ESSAYS ON THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 



^ ESSAYS ON THE 



SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 



by 
KARL MANNHEIM 

EDITED BY PAUL KECSKEMETI 



ROUTLEDGE & KEGAN PAUL LTD 

Broadway House, 68-74 Carter Lane 
London, E.G. 4 



First published in ig^2 

by Oxford University Press Inc. 

114 Fifth Avenue 

New York 11 

Printed in Great Britain 

by William Clowes and Sons Limited 

London and Beccles 



M3/ 



e 



EDITORIAL NOTE 



WHEN Karl Mannheim died early in 1947 in his fifty-third 
year, he left a number of unpublished manuscripts in 
varying stages of completion. At the invitation of Dr. 
Julia Mannheim, the author's widow and life-long collaborator, 
I assisted in setting up an editorial team selected from Mannheim's 
friends and former students, for the purpose of making at least 
part of that material available for publication. Furthermore, we 
felt that Mannheim's German writings had retained their full 
significance and ought to be reproduced in a form accessible to the 
English-speaking public. In all those decisions we were guided by 
the conviction that not only do the ideas laid down in these 
writings form an essential key to the full understanding of Mann- 
heim's work, but they contain a most important and topical 
contribution to social theory as well as an impetus for social 
action. 

The present volume is the sequel to Freedom, Power, and Demo- 
cratic Planning, which was published in 1950. It contains six essays 
which Mannheim wrote and published in German scientific 
magazines between 1923 and 1929: elaborations of one dominant 
theme, the Sociology of Knowledge, which at the same time 
represents one of Mannheim's main contributions to sociological 
theory. During the fifteen years since Mannheim's Ideology and 
Utopia was first published in this country, the Sociology of Know- 
ledge has moved into the centre of discussion among sociologists 
and philosophers. The ideas laid down in this new volume should 
greatly help in clarifying the important issues. 

The task of translating and editing the German text was per- 
formed by Dr. Paul Kecskemeti, Research Associate of the Rand 
Corporation, Santa Monica, California. He has also contributed 
an introduction on the history of the problem, and on the treatment 
it received at successive stages of Mannheim's work. In the task 

V 



EDITORIAL NOTE 

of translation he was mainly assisted by Mrs. Jean Floud, of th 
London School of Economics, 

The Rockefeller Foundation awarded a grant to the Institute c 
World Affairs of the New School for Social Research towards tb 
cost of preparing this manuscript for publication. 

ADOLPH LOWE. 

Institute of World Affairs 
New School for Social Research 
New York,N.r. 

February ig^i 



CONTENTS 



EDITORIAL NOTE page V 

I. INTRODUCTION I 

/. Preparatory remarks, p. i. 2. Influences, p. 2. 
J. The development of the sociology of knowledge, 
p. g. 4. Critique of Mannheim'' s sociology of know- 
ledge, p. 2y. 

ii. on the interpretation of 'weltan- 33 

schauung' 
I. The problem outlined, p. 23- 2. The struggle for a 
synthesis, p. 34. j. Rationalism v. Ir rationalism, 
p-Sy. 4. ^Weltanschauung' : its mode of presentation. 
The three ki?ids of meaning, p. 43. 5. The pre- 
theoretical structure of cultural products, p. 6j. 6. 
How can the global outlook be treated scientifically? 
p. 70. 

III. HISTORICISM 84 

I. Static and dynamic thought, p. 84. 2. The starting- 
points of a theory of historicism [Troeltsch), p. gy. 
3. Forms of historical movement, p. log. 4. Historicism 
and sociology, p. 124. 5. Dynamic standards in thought 
and practice, p. 126. 

IV. THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE I34 

/. The problem constellation, p. 134. 2. Theoretical 
positions, p. 146. 3. Sociology of knowledge from 
the standpoint of modern phenomenology {Max 
Scheler), p. 1^4. 4. Sociology of knowledge from the 
dynamic standpoint, p. lyg. 



CONTENTS 

V. COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON page IQ 

VI. ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION AND 
ITS SIGNIFICANCE FOR THE SOCIAL EDUCA- 
TION OF MAN 23( 

/. The social education of man, p. 230. 2. What is 
^ success^?, p. 255. 5. Objective and subjective success, 
p. 257. 4. Unstable and relatively stable forms of 
subjective success, p. 2jg. 5. The social structure and 
chances of success, p. 241. 6. Success in a career, 
p. 24'j. 7. Social sectors subject to and devoid of conflict, 
p. 24g. 8. Striving for success in general, p. 2jo. g. 
The striving for economic success, p. 2§y. 10. Histori- 
cal flexibility of economic ambition, p. 261. 11. Types 
of ambition; types of personality; types of culture, 
p. 266. 12. Flexibility of ambition according to social 
differentiation, p. 2yi. 

VII. THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 276 

/. How the problem stands at the moment, p. 2y6. 
2. The sociological problem of Generations, p. 286. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 32 1 

INDEX 323 



CHAPTER I 

INTRODUCTION 

I. PREPARATORY REMARKS 

THE present volume contains six essays written by Karl 
Mannheim during the early part of his academic career in 
Germany. These papers have not been available in English 
thus far; they have remained scattered in various German publica- 
tions. Their publication in the present collection of Mannheim's 
writings serves the purpose of illuminating the genesis and forma- 
tion of one of his most important contributions to sociology, the 
'Sociology of Knowledge'. 

For reasons of space, two essays of the same period, dealing with 
the same kind of topic, will be included in a second volume of 
essays, otherwise devoted to writings published after Mannheim's 
emigration from Germany in 1933. 

I have attempted to give a brief survey of the intellectual and 
political background of these writings, and of the stages through 
which Mannheim's ideas concerning the sociology of knowledge 
developed. 

Mannheim's sociology of knowledge was often misunderstood 
as a variant of scepticism and illusionism. I shall try to show 
that his purpose was not to demonstrate the inescapability of 
relativism and scepticism, but rather the thesis that in spite of the 
inescapability of certain relativist conclusions, genuine knowledge 
of historical and social phenomena was possible] According to him, 
participation in the social process, which renders one's perspec- 
tive partial and biased, also enables one to discover truth of deep 
human import. In Mannheim's approach, the productivity of ^^ 
social participation as a source of knowledge plays a more 
important role than the limitations which participation in the 
social process puts upon knowledge. The reader will see, once the 
luthor's intention has become clear, the universal and vital 
mport of the subject treated and of the author's approach. 



2 INTRODUCTION 

II. INFLUENCES 
I 

Mannheim, who was born in Budapest, a Central European 
city where German cultural influences were predominant, spent 
his formative years in Hungary and Germany during a period of 
extraordinary social and intellectual ferment. The period was that 
of the First World War and the chaotic time of revolution and 
counter-revolution immediately following it. It is somewhat 
diOicult for the present generation, accustomed to living in turmoil 
and amidst constant outbursts of violence, to recapture the 
impression of elemental upheaval and total collapse which seared 
itself into the soul of the 'front generation' of the First World 
War. What I mean is not so much the magnitude of the catas- 
trophe, the extent of deprivations and human as well as economic 
losses, as the fact that all that stark violence and destruction was 
completely unanticipated. It was reality itself, the very essence 
of man and society, which suddenly revealed itself in a completely 
new and terrible light. What nobody would have thought possible 
suddenly turned out to be real; what everyone had taken to be 
reality itself now stood revealed as an illusion. A complete re- 
orientation w#is felt to be necessary: a re-examination of all 
traditional ideas about reality, all values, all principles. There 
was, on the whole, no undertone of despair in all this. One may 
have lost much that one had cherished; one may have had to go 
through great ordeals and tribulations. But, at least, one also shed 
a great many illusions; one no longer lived in the shameful 
situation of taking the unreal for the real, of trusting illusory 
authorities and values. That generation of the First World War 
derived a great deal of fierce satisfaction from having Tound out' 
the generation of its fathers, its shams, its smugness, its profound 
insincerity and self-deception. It was a young generation that 
considered itself grown up while its elders were deluded and 
wicked children; and it felt that it could no longer be taken in, 
whatever happened. Much may have been lost, but truth at 
last was won. 



Such was the psychological climate during and after the First 
World War, at least in the region we are talking about : Germany 
and the Central European area under German cultural domi- 
nance. It was marked by stunned disillusionment and also by the, 
rapture of a newly won contact with true reality — of a new intel-i 
Icctual and moral power. In the West, the Tront generation's' 
reaction to the war was similar in some respects, but on the whole-. 



INFLUENCES 3 

less extreme. The 'front generations' of the Western democracies 
were also disillusioned as a result of the war experience; but their 
disillusionment was less traumatic and it had not necessarily to 
be over-compensated by a new, positive faith. In Germany (and 
also^in Russia) the stimulus of war and defeat led to revolution, 
i.e. to a transition from traumatic disillusionment to extravagant 
hope. The West experienced no revolution after the war. 

In order to understand the intellectual currents prevalent in 
Germany and Central Europe after the First World War, it is 
necessary to realize, first of all, that they contained much that was 
radically different from the intellectual climate of the West, 
nurtured as they were by revolutionary hopes — by the triumphant 
feeling that through revolution, victory could be wrested from 
defeat. In Germany, of course, the revolution was carried through 
rather half-heartedly in the social sphere. But there was enough 
of a climate of revolution to give young people the impression of a 
complete intellectual, spiritual, and moral re-orientation. Re- 
turning from war, the 'front generation' had to scale down its 
material pretensions; but its intellectual, social, and moral 
pretensions assumed gigantic dimensions. It was, to use one of 
Mannheim's favourite expressions, a climate of 'utopia'; and many 
new currents and theories nourished the front generation's 
Utopian consciousness, its feeling of having broken through the 
maze of old errors and illusions and having found at last the key 
to perfect knowledge and perfect action. It is important to note, 
in this connection, that this Utopian feeling manifested itself in 
many fields and many forms, in a rather chaotic and disparate 
fashion. 

We cannot speak of just one system of thought or programme of 
action as having expressed all by itself the young generation's 
Utopian outlook. Many contradictory and heterogeneous currents 
existed side by side, differing in almost every respect except 
one: they all claimed to embody, in a way, absolute truth, a 
truth more alive, more substantial, more integral than the 
exploded 'truths' of the previously dominant official and academic 
tradition. I shall mention a few of these currents — those which 
exercised a powerful influence upon Mannheim's thinking during 
this formative period, and contributed to the development of his 
'sociology of knowledge' . 

3 

One of these currents was, of course, Marxism, which had a 
fresh appeal for the 'front generation' of the First World War. 
Marx's basic prophecy, the advent of the proletarian age after 
the final collapse of capitalism, seemed on the point of bring 



INTRODUCTION 



realized, not only in Russia but also in Central Europe. IVIannheim 
was not an integral Marxist; as we shall see, he combined Marxian 
elements with many heterogeneous ones; but for him too, the 
decline of the bourgeoisie and the ascent of the proletariat were the 
essential feature of the contem.porary phase of history, and some 
Marxian theses, such as the 'ideological' nature of social thought, 
represented for him prime examples of a new essential insight 
that became possible through active participation in the historic 
process. On the other hand, he wanted to go beyond a Marxist 
orthodoxy according to which proletarian class-conscious thought 
alone represented reality as it was, 'adequately', while all those not 
sharing in this class perspective were necessarily deluded. (This 
thesis was propounded, for example, by Georg Lukacs.) 

But Marxism was not the only school which at that time 
claimed to have achieved novel insights of a substantial nature. 
Some purely theoretical movements that exercised no appreciable 
influence beyond the academic world also had a 'utopian' tinge 
in that they radically challenged the traditional outlook and 
proposed to replace a meaningless intellectual routine by a direct 
grasp of living reality. 



One of these movements was that towards 'synthesis' in the 
cultural sciences, especially in the history of ideas, of art, and of 
literature. Its spirit was one of revolt against the old, lifeless, dry- 
as-dust methods of historical research. Pre-war work in these 
fields was seen as having been largely devoted to meaningless 
detail, without any sense of the structure and significance of the 
whole. In the history of literature, for instance, the 'old school' 
traced individual 'motifs' through their many incarnations in 
literary works; it also tried to ascertain the literary or biographical 
'influences' that shaped the work of the various authors. All this 
seemed wholly irrelevant to the adherents of the new viewpoint of 
'^Geistesgeschichte\ To them, a 'motif' without its meaning, without 
/ its living significance in a context, seemed nothing; and it seemed 
sacrilegious to ignore the creative essence of the artist while 
focusing exclusively upon mere impulses, stimuli, and causal 
'influences' from without. The real task was that of reconstructing 
the spirit of past ages and of individual artists in a sympathetic, 
evocative way. This point of view was forcefully put forward in 
Friedrich Gundolf's Goethe (1916). Alois Riegl and Max Dvorak 
introduced this integrative and interpretative approach into the 
history of art. This new trend was characterized by a complete 
rejection of 'positivism', that is, the attempt to analyse human, 
cultural, intellectual phenomena in terms of causal mechanisms 






INFLUENCES • 5 

also operative in inanimate nature. Nothing that was as stereo- 
typed, as self-repeating as a physical law could, it was felt, do 
justice to the uniqueness of genius and of the human act in 
historyjBut this did not mean that these things were beyond the 
reach of 'science'. On the contrary, in so far as cultural and 
human phenomena were concerned, only the bold, ' synthetic' ^^ 
anti-positivist approach was truly 'scientific'. Wilhelm- Dilthey ^ 
was one of the earliest representatives of this point of view. 

One can hardly exaggerate the suggestive power these ideas 
exerted upon German academic thinking at that time. In philo- 
sophy, for instance, a branch of the neo-Kantian tradition — itself 
very much part of the old world that was to be swept away by the 
breath of the new spirit — concentrated upon elaborating the 
difference between generalizing natural science and concrete, 
individualizing history j(Windelband, Rickert). Max Weber, who 
was strongly impressed by Rickert's philosophical approach, 
^vorked out a system of interpretive sociology. In psychology, new 
qualitative methods were introduced in the place of Wundt's 
positivist approach. The Gestalt school began its attack upon 
"atomistic' associationism. In biology, Driesch and others pro- 
pounded vitalistic and organismic views. Mannheim responded 
strongly to the new 'synthetic' trend; a radical contrast between 
the 'static' concepts of natural science and mathematics on the 
one hand and the 'dynamic' concepts of historic and social 
sciences on the other became one of the essential features of his 
thinking. 



The new, 'synthetic' method of studying or rather recreating 
history had some important philosophical implications. The 
method was based upon the belief that the historian was able to 
establish genuine communion with the true import of the works 
an3~actions he studied. In order to achieve this, however, he had 
to divest himself of the concepts, value standards, and categories 
characteristic of his own age, and to learn to substitute for them 
the corresponding concepts, value standards, and categories of the 
period under examination. This whole procedure presupposed, if 
one analysed it from a philosophical viewpoint, that no standards 
and concepts had timeless validity. Each age had its own system 
of values; each yielded up its inmost essence only to those who 
approached it in such a way as to leave their own contemporary 
standards behind. Thus, the historian of art could not understand 
the essence of past works except by viewing them within the 
framework of a historic 'style' which the historian himself (if he 



6 INTRODUCTION 

were an artist) neither could nor would follow in his own produc- 
tion, but which he could transitorily make his o^vn while analysing 
and 'recreating' historic works.' This multiplicity of standards is, 
by the way, a perfectly straightforward phenomenon in repro- 
ductive art; we may think in this connection of musical performers 
who are also composers. While reproducing the works of the 
earlier masters, these performers 'slip into' this or that older style 
at will; but in their own compositions, they speak in a modern 
idiom. This multiplicity of standards, this sense of a time-bound 
variety of the forms in which aesthetic values are incarnated, was 
generalized, during the period I am speaking of, into a philo- 
sophical theory called 'historicism'. The central thesis of histori- 
cism was that no product of human culture could be analysed and 
understood in a 'timeless' fashion; interpretation had to begin by 
ascribing to each product a temporal index, by relating it to a 
period-bound 'style'. This applied not only to works of art but to 
every product of the human mind and to every human action. 

Historicism thus implied a complete relativism as regards 
values; it prohibited the direct application of any value standard 
one held valid for oneself, as a private person, when talking about 
past ages. Such direct application was held to be the arch sin 
which disqualified one as a faithful interpreter and a scientific 
historian. But this relativism was not felt to amount to a destruc- 
tion pure and simple of the values thus relativized. Once the 
fhistorian had put himself into the antiquarian mood in which he 
looked at cultural products, not with his own eyes but with the 
eyes of the denizens of bygone cultures, he was perfectly able to 
sense a greatness, a human significance, which pervaded the whole 

I historic process throughout its changing and perishable mani- 

jjestations. 

This sense of greatness, of glory, could be achieved only by 
viewing things in historical perspective: there was no other way 
of escaping a feeling of futility connected with everything human. 
The historicist movement may be explained as a manifestation of 
the Protestant religious consciousness which still had to have 
something to cling to, some experience of the Absolute, after all 
possible contents of a direct, naive belief had been corroded by 
scientific critique. , History, the graveyard of values, somehow 
assured an ethereal immortality for them, after their bodily reality 
was gone. The historicists felt, of course, that their devaluation of 
the 'direct', unbroken perspective of the naive believer was not a 
fit attitude for a creative spirit: for in order to create, one must be 
able to affirm something unconditionally. But they had the belief 
that History would still bring forth new creations of value by an 
unconscious process, objects of value toward which they would 



u 



INFLUENCES 7 

again play the role of connoisseur. Historicism recognized that it 
cauld not create; but it claimed to be alone able to do justice to 
the creative spirit. This was its 'utopia'. 

Mannheim strongly identified himself \s'ith historicism — this 
became one of the essential ingredients of the sociology of know- 
ledge. But in his hands, historicism became subtly transformed; 
for, as we shall see, he came more and more to stress the element 
of commitment, of action, as the real substance of the historic 
process. For him, the basic impulse toward historicism was not 
the need to save some possibility of communion with the Absolute, 
if only as the afterglo\v of a defunct religious tradition — although 
some such yearning may have been present — but rather the need 
to endo^v a progressive political creed ^vith depth, to save it from 
dogmatic shallo\\-ness. 



We have to mention one more academic school of German 
philosophy in which the 'utopian' spirit of the age found expres- 
sion: the plienomenological school. Edmund Husserl, who 
initiated the movement, challenged the predominantly Kantian 
orientation of German academic philosophy. The Kantian tradi- 
tion viewed all objects of kno^vledge as the reflection oi' the subjectivT 
factor in knowledge: thepre-existent organization of the mind 
which determined in advance ^v'hat kind ofkno\\iedge would be 
possible. Husserl_ aimed at a philosophy which would again 
reverse Kant's 'Copernican' revolution that had given the subject 
predominance over the object. His aim was to show that in true 
knowledge, it was the 'things themselves' that'"were^ras]3ed, not 
mere reflections of a pre-existent, autonomous 'consciousness'. 
Here again, we see the aspiration to achieve communion ^vith 
reality itself. Phenomenology seemed to open a fresh avenue to 
substantial knowledge; this accounted for its appeal to the Tront 
generation'. 
JTheJsubstantial knowledge' j)mimsedj3YjDJio^ A^-as 

_la_]3e_kngwledge of 'essences' rather than of tangible things of 
the o utside world: thc>c, Hu>-erl held, nc\'cr rexcaled themselves 
compTeteTy But' only in superficial, partial aspects. What did 

jeyeal itself fully was, for instance, the ideal mathematical 
object. This could be kno\ni in a way free from the pitfalls of 
empirical knowledge, with full, apodictical evidence. 'Counting', 
for instance, presupposed grasp of a procedure prescribed by the 
object itself; it was this grasp of the meaning of the procedure 
that mattered, not the psychological, causal sequence in which 
this or that subject came to master the procedure. Individual 
learning processes were myriad and each followed a different 



i 



8 INTRODUCTION 

causal route, but counting itself, when learned, was the same 
operation, performed in the same way in 'essential' respects — no 
matter how non-essential details, such as the particular language 
used, may have differed. Husserl himself kept his analysis close to 
mathematical 'essences', but his followers ranged far and wide; 
they discovered many 'procedures', not of a mathematical or 
logical nature, that were similarly prescribed by 'essential' rules, 
and similarly independent of the psychological contingencies of 
the learning process. Values seemed particularly appropriate 
examples of the kind of entity that could be grasped in its 'essence', 
with complete certainty and perfect insight. The phenomeno- 
logical school thus became mainly identified with the doctrine of 
absolute as against relative, subjective values; it stood at tlie 

"opposite pole from relativist historicism. Max Schder was^ the 
chief representative of the objectivist, absolutist theory of values 
within the phenomenological school. Curiously, however, Scheler 

" also played a considerable role in initiating the study of 'sociology * 
of knowledge' ; so far as I can see, he was the first to use the term. 
We shall see later how Scheler, the absolutist, became one of the 
initiators of a discipline which is generally considered as insepar- 
ably linked to a relativist position. 

Mannheim rejected the phenomenologists' theory of an objec- 
tive, absolute knowledge of values; but he accepted certain other 
teachings of the school, and especially the doctrine of 'intentional 
acts'. This doctrine asserted that in order to grasp an object 
belonging to a certain type, one had to adopt a specific 'inten- 
tional' attitude which corresponded to that type of object. Thus, 
knowledge of the phenomena of the material world could be 
achieved only if one put oneself in the role of the observer relying 
on sense data, measurements, and deductions from premises 
expressed in quantitative language; but the study of human 
impulses, values, and acts required an entirely diflferent 'inten- 
tional' appro ach. Mannheim used this type of reasoning in 
rejecting positivist sociology; according to him, the error of 
positivism consisted in neglecting the 'phenomenological' diflfer- 

^ence between the inanimate and the cultural-historical world (cf. 
the essay on Sociology of Knowledge, p. 150, below). However, to' 
him, the 'phenomenological' differences among various realms of 
being, though important, concerned the superficial rather than 
essential aspects of things; and he was impatient to penetrate 

Jbeyond the phenomenological surface to the very core of things, 

Jto the substance of historical reality which only the active, fully 
committed subject was able to reach. This is the essence of Mann 






rHcirh's sociology of knowledge; it is his 'utopia' in the development 
of which Marxism and histori 



I 



)ricism played the most decisive role. 



DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 9 

X bP idea of 'existentially determined' knowledge, which is one of 
the cornerstones of the theory, may be traced to Marxism, 
whereas historicism is the source of the doctrine of the 'per- 
spectivist' nature of knowledge. 



III. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 



Some of the germinal ideas around which Mannheim developed 
his sociological theory of the mind can be found expressed in an 
early work, devoted not to sociological but philosophical prob- 
lems. This is his doctor's thesis,, ^Structural Analysis of Epistemology 
(1922). (This essay will be included in the second volume of 
Mannheim's papers to be published in the present series; refer- 
ences are to the German edition, Supplement No. 57 to Kant- 
Studien, Berlin 1922.) 

The title itself strikes a characteristic note. The 'structural' 
approach, in fact, is a fundamental feature of Mannheim's 
sociological method. To look at a thing from a 'structural' point 
of view means to explain it, not as an isolated, self-contained 
unit, but as part of a wider structure; the explanation itself is 
based not so much on the properties of the thing itself as on the 
place it occupies within the structure. Adopting this 'structural' 
-approach, one sees that the 'meaning' of some individual phenom- 
enon, e.g. an utterance, can be determined only with reference 
to the conceptual system to which it belongs. In the 'sociology of 
knowledge', this principle plays an extremely important role. In 
the Structural Analysis of Epistemology, it is put forward as valid in 
'logical' analysis: Mannheim says that primacy among logical 
forms belongs to 'systematization'. All the simpler, more elemen- 
tary 'logical' forms, such as concepts or judgments, can be under- 
stood only in terms of this all-embracing, comprehensive form 
(p. 7). Thinking is defined as 'an effort to find the logical place of 
a concept in the total framework of the mental spheres; in other 
words, a thing is taken to be explained, comprehended, in so far 
as we have discovered its place in the currently accepted orders, 
series and levels' (p. 14). 'There is no such thing as a completely 
and finally isolated, self-sufficient mental creation. Even an action, \ 
let alone a concept, displays the structure of a systematization; 
it is this structure which gives it meaning and consistency, which 
in fact makes it what it is' (pp. 76 f.). 

The Structural Analysis of Epistemology follows the usage of the 
neo-Kantian school in defining logic: logic is the science which 
deals with concepts, judgments , and systems, and, above all, with 



lo INTRODUCTION 

their 'validity' or logical worth. This 'logic', of course, has nothing 
to do with rigorous, formal logic as it is understood by present-day 
logicians; Mannheim apparently never became influenced by the 
'Vienna circle' ^s•hich put the study of logic in the German- 
speaking countries on an exact basis, after the method o^ Principia 
Mathematica. To him, the central problem of logic was, and re- 
mained, 'validity' rather than consistency: the question was only 
whether one had to ascribe timeless, absolute, or rather relative, 
'situationally determined' validity to scientific assertions and 
conceptual systems. In the Structural Analysis of Epistemology, the 
question is decided squarely in favour of absolute rather than 
relati\e validity. 'It is . . . implied in the very structure of the 
theoretical sphere that it must itself be assumed as a-temporally 
valid' j(p. 2i). The 'dynamic' logic, according to which the very 
form of thinking changes so that nothing can be said to be valid 
in an absolute sense, without reference to a historically given 
frame^\•ork, is expressly rejected^ (p. 36, footn.). Yet several 
arguments contained in the essay"seem to point in the direction 
of the later position which rejects 'a-temporal validity'. Thus, ^\-e 
see a comparison between the historical development of science, 
art, and philosophy. Science develops in a straight line; new in- 
sights are added to the system and old conceptions which are not 
consistent with the later findings are simply discarded (pp. 12. 29). 
But with art, the case is different: the later works in no way 
'refute' the earlier ones; each style, each period has, so to speak, 
its own 'validity'. Philosophy, however, is situated somewhere in 
the middle between these two types: although there is only 'one 
truth' in philosophy, at least ideally (this being said in tribute to 
the principle of 'timeless' validity), the old solutions are* not 
simply discarded; they have something of the timeless glory of a 
work of art (p. 30). 

This typology of the forms of development in various fields 
plays a considerable role in the later works on sociology of know- 
ledge (see, for instance, Interpretation of Weltaruchauung, pp. 61 ^.). 
In art or philosophy, no straight 'yes' and 'no' can pass from one 
historical stage to the other, but a new, complete system is begun 
at every stage. This is the central argument of Mannheim's 
historicisih; he concludes from this in his later work that the 
positivist method is not appropriate to the study of cultural 
phenomena. 

The problem of the relationship between the 'genetic process' 
in history and the '\alidity' of knowledge, which plays such a 
considerable role in Mannheim's sociology of knowledge, is 
already touched upon in Structural Analysis of Epistemology. Although 
he maintains in this early work that 'validity' is untouched by 



DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE ii 

the contingencies of the historical process, he is troubled; he 
admits that there is a 'tension' between the concept of absolute 
validity and the 'empathy' which the historian must make use of 
when he mterprets earUer philosophers (p. 35). He asks: What 
is the significance of the temporal for the non-temporal? What 
ideas are 'possible' at just one time, and not at other times? (p. 35). 
This question later receives a sociological answer: it is historical 
and social reality which creates the possibility of certain insights. 
The main conclusion reached in Structural Analysis is that 
epistemology is not a self-contained discipline; it cannot furnish 
a standard by which we should be able to distinguish truth from 
falsehood. All it can do is to re-arrange knowledge already 
supposed to have been achieved, and trace it back to some science 
which is supposedly 'fundamental' in that it deals with a field in 
which every item of knowledge may be considered as having its 
origin. Mannheim mentions three sciences that can play the role 
of 'fundamental science' in this sense: psychology, logic, and 
ontology. What he means is that we can deal with 'all' knowledge 
either as a psychological datum, or as a logical entity, or as an 
ontological (metaphysical) problem; epistemology can be written 
from any of these three points of view, but it cannot decide which 
is the correct one. What is important in this for the later develop- 
ment of the sociology of knowledge is that a philosophical 
discipline, epistemology, is stated to be unable to solve its problem 
by its own resources; it must look elsewhere for a standard of true 
knowledge. In Structural Analysis, two other philosophical dis- 
ciplines and psychology play this role of fundamental science; 
later, that role is taken over by sociological theory. (The analysis 
of society as an entity developing in history succeeds to all philo- 
sophy as the 'fundamental science'. ^ Epistemology is radically 
devalued as a critique of knowledge; and this devaluation is 
completed, as we see, even before Mannheim turns to sociology, 
or the sociological philosophy of history, as the fundamental 
science. But epistemology takes its revenge in a subtle way: all 
later sociological analyses remain centred around an epistemo- 
logical problem, that of the validity of 'existentially' or 'socio- 
logically' determined knowledge; thus, the problems of the 
sociology of knowledge are never put by Mannheim in purely 
empirical ^.erms. His thinking never really cut adrift from 
philosophy.) 

/ 

iThe essay on Interpretation of Weltanschauung (1923) took up the 
problem of the proper scientific treatment of 'cultural' objects, 
such as works of art, philosophy, etc. The main thesis is that such 



12 INTRODUCTION 

I objects cannot be treated by the methods of natural science,for 
the correct understanding of cultural phenomena always involves 
the interpretation of meanings, and meanings cannot be 'ob- 
served' like the things with which physicists deal. All interpreta- 
tion, however, presupposes a grasp of some totality, some system, 
of which meaningful elements arc parts; this is again the idea of 
'structural analysis', now applied to historical objects. In dealing 
with such objects, the first difficulty encountered is that, mtnle 
'intei-pretation' itself is a theoretical pursuit, the things to be 
interpreted are rebellious toward the theoretical approach. They 
are products of men as rounded beings, living in the volitional, 
emotional, and aesthetic sphere (as Dilthey had stressed). How 
then can theory account for them? It is possible to deny, of course,- 
that theory can do this; art, religion, social, and political action 
are, one might say, 'irrational' things, to be 'felt' but not to be 
analysed, Mannheim, however, rejected this irrationalism. In the 
essay on Weltanschauu?ig, as in later works, he fought a battle on 
/ two fronts: against the thesis that all cultural production is 
/ essentially irrational and impervious to analysis, as well as against 
\ the doctrine that all scientific analysis must confirm to the model 
\ of natural science. 

'It is well known that the Hellenic or Shakespearian spirit, 
presented itself under diflferent aspects to different generations. 
This, however, does not mean that knowledge of this kiijid is ' 
relative and hence worthless. What it does mean is that the type : 
of knowledge conveyed by natural science differs fundamentally! 
from historical knowledge— we should try to grasp the meaning P 
and structure of historical understanding in its specificity, rather 
than reject it merely because it is not in conformity with the 
positivist truth-criteria sanctioned by natural science' {Interpretation 
of Weltanschauung, p. 6i, below). 

Mannheim's position in the essay we are discussing was that 
the 'a-theoretical', e.g. the 'aesthetic', was not 'irrational'; it 
was interpretable and analysable. The t ask of analysis consisted 
in discovering the structural whole to wEich these a-theoretical 
^phenomena belonged; once this was accomplished, it was possible 
to account for their genesis and for the laws of their development. 
In this fashion, theory could be super-imposed upon the a 
theoretical. This task, however, could be carried out on vario 
levels. Meaning could be defined as 'objective', 'expressive', an 
'documentary' meaning. 

The first kind of meaning is the most superficial one: the 

-Istructure' in terms of which it is defined is a simple means-end 

correlation. 'Expressive' meaning is less obvious: we can detect 

and interpret it by finding out what emotional -psychic state a 






DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 13 

subj ect has intended to express by a work or by an action. 'Docu- 
mentary' meaning is the most recondite and fundamental oTalT: 
it~consists in what a \vork or action reveals about the author's 
total orientation and essential character. This is, as a rule, hidden 

_Froni the au thor him-t4f; he is the instrument rather than tKe~ 
master jofthe "documentary' meaning manlFested by his products. 
When we deal with the 'documentary^' meaning of actions and 

\ works, we have to do wdthlhe global outlook, the Weltanschauung, 
of their authors. This is the most comprehensive whole in terms 
of which meanings can be investigated; and its essence is historical. 
Each historical unit of civilization^a certain period of \ye5tern 
(;;ii1tnre^ for ins tance — has its own [ftltanschauung, as it has its 
Style: and historical science is essentially~tlie analysis of works and 
ar.tiQns in terms C){ Weltanschau ung. It is this kind of analysis whicH, ~~ 
according to Mannlieim, natWal science is not equipped to 
accomplish; and, in fact, he says, the analysis cannot be performed 
once and for all, in a timelessly valid fashion. Documentary ^, 
interpretation, the interpretation of Weltanschauung, must be under- ^^^ 
taken anew in every period (p. 6 1 ) , JbrJiJs. only 'substance that 
comprehend s substance' {ibid.): it is tlie historically, cxistendally 

^committed analyst \vho can understand documentary meanings. 
The study of Weltajuchauung is a 'dynamic' kind of study: it 
requires sympatlietic participation rather than detachment. It 
succeeds the better, the greater the affinity between the analyst and 
his object (p. 62). This may be repellent to adherents of exact 
scientific method ; yet it would be a wrong kind of positivism to 
disregard Weltanschauung, for it exists for all to see. 

In this paper, we come closer to the central themes of the 
sociology of knoAvledge. Most of the examples are taken from the 
history of art (the essay appeared in a Year Book for History of 
Art), and the entire argument may be read as a methodological 
manifesto of the school of Geistesgeschichte (cf the preceding 
section). Yet the concept of "documentary meaning' transcends 
pure Geistesgeschichte. It is an existential concept; it is fi rst intro- 
duced in connection with the problem of unconscious hypocrisy, 
of a false consciousness or 'non-genuine' {uneig£?itli£h].e:^te,nce, as 
the existentialists ^vould put it. This foreshadows the concept of 1 j 
'total ideolog)'', one of the most provocative ideas in Ideology and \ \ 
Utopia; 'documentary meaning' is not confined to art qua art, 
literature qua literature; itconc^rns what is mos t real in man: his 
place within the whole of historical realit) . 

3 

In Mannheim's next essay, the paper on Historicism (1924), 
the sociological viewpoint emerges as the decisive one. Since 



14 INTRODUCTION 

Weltanschauung must be studied from within a Weltanschauung 
(only 'substance' can understand 'substance'), we are committed 
to a sociological point of view: the view of life characterizing our 
own age 'has become thoroughly sociological' (p. 84). If we start 
from this overall premise, we shall see that iig„conceptual system, 
no value system can claim timeless validity. | Yet we shall not 
succumb to relativism, since what we assert is hot mere change in 
these conceptual and value systems but change subject to an 
'ordering principle'. Everything will have its place within an 
evolving structure in which values have their being. Reason, truth, 
knowledge must be redefined as essentially linked to this historic 
dynamism. 

'When one takes one's departure, not from a static Reason, but 
from a dynamically developing totality of the whole psychic and 
intellectual life as from the ultimately given, the place of epistem^ 
ology . . . will be taken by the philosophy of history as a dynamic 
metaphysic' (p. 97). 

This is the new answer to the problem raised in the Structural 
Analysis of Epistemology; it is an intermediate answer. The final one 
will directly name the 'sociology of knowledge' as the successor of 
epistemology (see below, p. 18). 

The subject who knows history is the subject who participates in 
history as an active being, sharing in the dominant social aspira- 
tions of his epoch. There is, an 'inner link' between 'aspiration' 
and 'knowledge' (p. 103). 'Historical knowledge is 'bound to a 
location' within the historic^rocess (standortgebunden); the claim 
to 'self-evident' knowledge of 'absolute' values, put forward by the 
phenomenologists, is nothing but an illusion. In reality, there is 
nothing 'absolute' about such firmly held value positions: they, 
too, merely reflect a 'standpoint' resulting from the interplay of 
historical, social forces. 

Mannheim declares that his doctrine of historical knowledge 
as a function of the theoretical 'standpoints' produced by history 
,' tself is not relativism — at least not relativism of the kind which 
can be easily refuted as self-destroying. The anti-relativist argu- 
ment is that, if we assert that 'all' knowledge is merely the reflec- 
tion of a passing historical constellation, we cannot claim assent 
to this statement as a 'true' one. But Mannheim maintains that 
his brand of historicism does not succumb to this argument. For 
one thing, he says, even on his theory, historic knowledge remains 
controllable: it must fit the known facts, must account for them. 
Secondly, and this is more important, all objections will disappear 
if one realizes that the old 'static' conception of truth is not the 
only possible one; if we as sume truth itself to be the sum and 
substance of_the_dynamic process of history, the n it w ill become 



DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 15 

meaningless to apply 'static' truth standards to historic know- 
ledge. 

I shall leave a critical discussion of this position to the next 
section; at this point, I am concerned only with the exposition 
of the historicist doctrine as held by Mannheim. ^Vhat this 
doctrine asserts is, I think, that the subject talking about history 
and related topics (i.e. topics outside of the purview of mathe- 
rnatics arid natural science, where 'static' standards of truth are 
admittedly legitimate) can achieve only one kind of 'truth', that 
is, a communion with, and'pafficipafion m, the real trends and 
forces of history. To be out of touch with the basic trend is to miss 
the truth;, identification with the basic trend will guarantee true 
knowledgct^ It is true that this knowledge will shift its basis as 
trends chan^. But if this kind of knowledge is not 'scientific', 
then there can be no scientific knowledge of history. However, it 
would be unwarranted defeatism to admit that history is beyond 
the scope of scientific analysis. If one accepts 'dynamic' truth as a 
legitimate type of truth, then there will be no difficulty in con- 
ceding that historical knowledge is perspective-bound and yet 
maintains its scientific character. 

I think we can best understand what is said here if we remember 
that throughout the history of philosophy, 'truth' has been 
conceived in two ways. According to one definition (the Aristotelian 
one), the adjectives 'true' and 'false' can be applied only to sen- 
tences; the concept of 'truth' has nothing to do with the things of 
the world as they exist in themselves. According to the other 
definition, 'truth' is first and foremost an attribute of existence, 
and only secondarily oi discourse. One is or is not in the TiTith; and 
one's possession of Truth depends on being in communion with a 
reality which 'is' or embodies truth. This concept of truth is the ^ 
one contained in the religious tradition of Christianity, in / 
voluntaristic philosophies, and in existentialism. 1 

Mannheim's thinking was of the voluntaristic type: the 'truth' 
which interested him was a 'truth' embodied in a real process, 
rather than a 'truth' merely^ exhibited in discourse. This is, at 
bottom, a religious conception: truth is an object of belief. Mann- 
heim believed in the truth of History; historicism was for him 
the legitimate successor of religion,, as he indicates in this essay 
(p. 85). Hence, although his sociology of knowledge, in spite of his 
disclaimers, was certainly a relativistic doctrine, it was just as 
certainly not a sceptical or agnostic one. For want of a better 
word, I should like to designate his position as a kind, not of 

* For a rejection of the theory that 'truth' applies specifically to assertions 
rather than things, see Ivlartin Heidegger, Sein imd ^eit, pp. 214-21. 



i6 INTRODUCTION 

relativist agnosticism, but of relativist 'gnosticism'; history, for 
him, was a royal road to truth rather than a procession of 
errors. 

4 

The essay on Sociology of Knowledge (1925), Mannheim's first 
outline of the theory which is presented in full detail in Ideology 
and Utopia, is a discussion of Max Scheler's Problem of a Sociology of 
Knowledge (published as the introduction to a collection of essays 
by various authors on this topic). 1 

As mentioned in the previous section, Scheler was a leading 
member of the phenomenological school and the author of a 
radically anti-relativist theory of values. That he became the first 
proponent of a sociological theory of knowledge is something of a 
freak of German intellectual history in the 'twenties, Mannheim 
himself saw in this a confirmation of his theory of Weltanschauung 
if an idea becomes part and parcel of the global outlook of an 
epoch, then friends and foes, conserv^atives and progressives, 
relativists and absolutists will be bound to make use of it. I do not 
think that it was as simple as that; Scheler hit upon the idea of a 
sociology of knowledge as parto£a vast strategic conception in his 
campaign against positivism.' What Scheler wanted to achieve by 
a sociological analysis of the various types of knowledge was the 
annihilation of Comte's famous theory of the 'three stages' 
human knowledge passes from a 'theological' through a 'meta 
physical' to a final 'positive' stage, that of science., Science is the 
last word; after its advent, the earlier 'stages' are left behind, 
antiquated, dead. Scheler, a passionate thinker if ever there was 
one, hated this doctrine with every fibre of his being; how coul 
it be destroyed? Essentially, by showing that 'science' was not th 
paradigm, the only adequate form of knowledge. The preseni 
ascendancy of natural science was by no means proof that scieno 
was a superior form of knowledge, more valid than religion o 
metaphysics. It was merely the consequence of certain sociological' 
facts. For indeed, it depended on sociological factors, on the 
prevailing organization of society, which type of knowledge ^vould 
be cultivated. And a 'sociology of knowledge' was needed to find 
out which type of thinking would be practised by men at this or 
that time. The 'mind' as such was powerless to determine this 

(R-9)- 

(JSciencc a superior form of knowledge? Not at all, Scheler said. 
Science will be cultivated in societies dedicated in the first place 
to the manipulation and control of things (p. 99)., Such a society 
is the bourgeois capitalistic one. Societies dedicatee! to the pursuit 

1 Versuche zu einer Soziologie des Wissens, Munich and Leipzig, 1924. 



DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 17 

of other values, especially spiritual ones, will cultivate other 
forms of knowledge. From the vantage point of a free, disinterested 
meditation of things of the spii'it, the scientific form of knowledge 
appears as a rather inferior though valid form. And Schcler, whose 
earlier works showed a Catholic orientation, here assails the 
Western Christian tradition. It was the Church which in fact 
supported exact science and technology, for the 'spontaneous, 
metaphysical mind' was an enemy of both dogmatic religion and 
materialist science. The Church needed science as an ally in its 
struggle against undogmatic metaphysics (p. 68). And the Church 
had power: it was able to make sure that no form of knowledge 
as radically inimical to its power interests as metaphysical know- 
ledge should be cultivated in Europe. However, Europe is not the 
world; in the Asiatic cultures, metaphysics is the dominant force, 
rather than dogmatic religion or materialist science. In conclusion 
Scheler calls for a 'meeting of East and West' in a way fore- 
shadowing Northrop: 

/The crazy positivist idea that the evolution of all human 
knowledge has to be judged in terms of a small segment of the 
curve of modern Western cultural evolution must at long last be 
discarded >.One must arrive at the insight, by means of a sociology 
of knowledge, that . . . Europe and Asia have tackled the possible 
tasks of human acquisition of knowledge from radically different 
directions. Europe was going /rom matter to the soul, Asia, from the 
soul to matter. Therefore, the stages of evolution ?nust be funda- 
mentally different in the two cases — until the point is reached 
where they meet in a cultural synthesis which is already under way. 
Universal man, possible in essence, will only be born when that 
synthesis is accomplished' (p. 114; italics in the original). 

^n his essay on the Sociology of Knowledge, Mannheim does not 
deaf with Scheler's 'strategic' intent. He rather treats Scheler as a 
Conservative thinker who is versatile enough to recognize the 
'stubborn fact' of the dependence of the mind on material factors, 
but who still would like tojcombine this insight with a theory of 
'static', unchanging essences] This, Mannheim says, is impossible. 
One cannot, as Scheler would, assign history merely the role of 
determining which 'ideally possible' forms of knowledge would 
actually be cultivated in society, while entrusting a pure 'mind' 
outside history with the role of elaborating that knowledge itself, f 
The 'ideal' sphere, that of cultural creation, is not self-contained; 
it is itself part and parcel of the historic-social process (p. 162). / 

Such ideas had already made their appearance in the earlier 
essays. But now, they are no longer stated in purely academic 
terms. The various ideas in which the historical process expresses 

F.S.K. — 2 



i8 INTRODUCTION 

itself are defined as 'world postulates', identified with one or the 
other social class. The entire analysis has a strongly political tinge; 
the influence of Marxism overshadows that of such purely 
academic schools of thought as historicism or Geistesgeschichte^ 
iMannheim sets out to show, in fact, that sociology of knowledgej 
las a new type of insight, becomes possible only when the politic^ 
and economic development of society has reached a certain stage 
At first, there must have been an 'oppositional science', bent upoi 
'unmasking' the power-oriented ideologies of the earlier hiei 
archical system; this was the first step toward bringing about thl 
constellation in which a sociological theory of the mind become^ 
possible. After this, social evolution had to lead to a total relativiza- 
tion of all thought and to the recognition of the social sphere as 
the decisive determining factor of culture; when all these 
conditions are satisfied, the sociology of knowledge will not only 
become possible; it will in fact be the master science dealing with 
the validity of knowledge, taking the place of epistemology (this 
is the end point toward which the evolution begun with the 
Structural Analysis was tending). 

The 'ideological' analysis of thought systems, the discovery of 
the primacy of the social factor— all this is straight Marxism. 
While constructing his sociology of knowledge on this Marxian 
basis, however, Mannheim rejected the proletarian class con- 
sciousness' claim to possess the monopoly of 'adequate' knowledge 
(p. 153). Each historical standpoint contains some truth: 'There 
is an existentially determined truth content in human thought 
at every stage of its development' (p. 176); and each standpoint 
also falls short of complete truth: no class exhausts the complete 
meaning of the world process (p. 147). As in the essay on Histori- 
cism, only one Absolute is recognized: that is the historical 
process in its entirety, of which only partial, 'perspectivic' know- 
ledge can be attained. 'The historicist standpoint, which starts 
with relativism, eventually achieves an absoluteness of view, 
because in its final form it posits history itself as the Absolute' 
(p. 172). 

Wc see that, after the introduction of Marxian elements, 
Mannheim re-asserted his basic allegiance to historicism; but 
somehow the serenity of the older historicist view, an impartial, 
purely academic contemplation of all ages, is gone. For it is no 
longer enough to understand the past; from now on,^ the accent 
is upon 'the emerging and the actual' (p. 165). Everything 
depends on being in tune with what actually is working itself out 
in the turmoil of history; this would be the best kind of 'perspec- 
tivic' truth one could achieve. But Mannheim admits that it 
would be asking too much of human knowledge to bid it tell 



DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 19 

what the 'goal-meaning' of the present period is (p. 172). What is 
possible is belief: after one has achieved a completely 'dynamic' 
orientation, admitting the relativity of all knowledge, including 
one's own, one may still recognize that the various relative 
standpoints constitute themselves in the element of truth (p. 178).-^ 
The accent now^ is on the 'genuineness' of one's orientation, rather 't,^ 
than on the 'adequacy' of the various interpretations of Weltan- 
schauung, as before. Accordingly, the former rejection of positivism 
is now qualified : jToritivism is wrong as regards the proper method 
of the interpretation of cultures, but its attitude is 'genuine' and 
hence it still retains its value for us (p. I5i).^^arxism again, in 
spite of its limitations, is recognized as therlmost 'genuine' per- 
spective in which one can view the world today. 
^^ In the essay on Sociology of Kjioidedge, we see a shift toward 
the concrete. The various 'standpoints' are now seen as expressing 
the aspirations ofconcrete groups; and the task of the sociology 
of knowledge is to ascertain the correlation between philosophical, 
intellectual 'standpoints' on the one hand, and concrete social 
'currents' on the other. Not t hat the whole 'superstructure' ot 
ideas can be explained in terms of interests; the ideas have their 
own content which cannot be traced back to group interests in 
every instance. .But it can be shown, Mannheim asserts, that 
concrete groups organized around certain dominant interests 
are 'committed' to a certain 'style' of thinking and feeling, not 
derived from those interests as such, but associated with them 
(p. 185). 



In a paper not included in the present series, on 'Ideological 
and Sociological Interpretation of Cultural Objects' (in Jahrbuch 
fur Soziologie, 1926, G. Salomon, ed.), the general, methodological 
principles of Mannheim's sociology of knowledge are summarized, 
^ny product of the human mind can be interpreted 'from wdthin', 
as to its content taken in itself, and 'frorti^ without', as an 
'ideology' serving to promote a social aspiration; When a cultural 
object is seen 'from without', it appears as functionally dependent 
on some more comprehensive totality; it loses its seemingly self- 
contained individuality. But this does not mean that it is com- 
pletely dissolved as a unit of meaning and seen merely as a causal 
product of 'meaningless', brute factors. The 'existential' factors on 
which an ideologically interpreted w^ork is seen to depend are 
themselves 'meaningful' rather than 'purely' causal, brute forces. 
Moreover, the two types of interpretation cannot be neatly 
separated from one another: the 'functional' meaning affects- the 
'immanent' meanhig. Hence, a sociological, functional analysis is 



20 INTRODUCTION 

relevant even to 'direct' interpretation. History, of course, 
essentially consists of 'functional' interpretation. 



^When this paper was written, Mannheim was working on his 
Habilitationsschrift, a thesis he had to submit prior to appointment 
as 'Dozent' at the university of Heidelberg, The subject was 
German conservative thought in the early nineteenth century. 
This thesis 1 opens a series of essays in which the principles of 
the sociology of knowledge are no longer formulated abstractly, 
but applied to show how specific 'styles of thought', 'doctrinal 
currents', and the like are associated with concrete groups, their 
aspirations, and their interactions, 

The problem treated in the essay on Conservative Thought [to 
be published in the second volume] is how the predominantly 
conservative and romantic climate of thought in Germany be- 
tween 1800 and 1830 can be accounted for in terms of a real 
struggle among concrete social groups. The first thing to note is 
the peculiar class structure of German society at that time. An 
independent commercial or industrial middle class did not exist; 
there were only two politically influential groups, the landed 
nobility and the bureaucratic personnel of centralized, monarchic 
vadministrations. Besides these, a socially 'unattached' intelli- 
gentsia also emerged: a group not possessing influence or social 
power, but capable of providing other ,groups with a convincing, 
eflfective formulation of their aspirations^Had the times been quiet, 
the entrenched groups would have needed no propaganda; they 
could also have done without thinking through their own position, 
without becoming articulately conscious of the ultimate principles 
of their conservatism. But the times were not quiet. A new class, 
the bourgeoisie, challenged both the landed aristocracy and the 
absolutist bureaucracy; in the French Revolution, the Third Estate 
made bold to remake the entire social world in its own image. 
The German landed nobility was caught in a severe cross-pressure 
between the rising capitalist forces, represented by the French 
Revolution, and the bureaucratic monarchies (of which Frederi- 
cian Prussia was the prototype). This was the challenge that led 
to the formulation of conservative platforms: in order to defend 
their threatened power, the old, entrenched classes started com- 

1 The Habilitationsschrift as such was not pubhshed. A modified version 
appeared in Archivfiir Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, vol. 57, 1927; the text 
to be pubhshed is an abridged version based upon both the Habilitationsschrift 
and the Archiv text, prepared by Mannheim himself for publication in English. 



DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 21 

bating abstract rationalism as such, in which they recognized 
the corrosive force eating away the foundations of the old society. 
The conservative platform stressed the importance of the concrete, 
the unique, the personal; it warned against attempts to do away 
with the 'organically grown' traditions of society and to rebuild 
everything on the basis of a few 'self-evident' truths. Conservatism, 
I^iannheim says, is not the same thing as 'traditionalism'. The 
latter is an inarticulate, unreflected human trend or attitude — an 
'instinctive' clinging to familiar, habitual ways of thought and 
action. But conservatism is more than this; it is a fully self-conscious 
position, worked out in response to a power challenge. Conserva^ 
tism in.Gfrmany was born from the threat of social transformation. 
Its emphasis upon the 'concrete', the 'personal', the 'irrational' 
was not a matter of merely 'thinking' about man and society; it was 
a polemical weapon against the rationalism of the Enlightenment, 
both of the bourgeois-revolutionary and the bureaucratic kind. 

Mannheim notes in this connection a certain convergence be- 
tween the conservative and the socialist critique of bourgeois 
rationalism. Both the conservative counter-revolutionary and the 
socialist revolutionary are, in a way, 'romanticists'; they both 
need principles which transcend the 'cold' rationality of the 
bourgeois or bureaucrat. But the two positions are obviously 
not identical. 'Proletarian' thought is still essentially rational at 
bottom, in spite of the intrusion of revolutionary romanticism; it 
is fundamentally related to positivism. (We may recall at this 
point the remarks made about the 'genuineness' of the positivist 
attitude in the essay on Sociology of Knowledge, above, p. 19.) The 
'proletarian' accepts the industrial civilization created by capital- 
ism; he wants to develop it to the utmost, in order to utilize it for 
his own purposes. The conservative, however, rejects the industrial 
trend as such; he can see in it only a negative force, a threat to 
organic life patterns on which, according to him, order and culture 
rest. Thus, the conservative defends a lost position; he is pitted 
against the irresistible force of industrial evolution. Does this also 
mean that he has lost touch with Truth itself — Truth being 
equated, in Mannheim's system, with 'the emerging and actual' 
content of History? Not quite, Mannheim seems to say; for History, 
the Absolute, confers neither absolute triumph nor absolute 
defeat. What has once existed can never become completely in- 
substantial; and even in the industrial era, the personalized, 
concrete, non-rational survives, either in the non-capitalistic 
sector of society, or in purely 'private' relationships. Thus the 
conservative position is depository of a fraction of the Truth of 
history which the other positions neglect. 

To anticipate the language of Ideology and Utopia, conservative 



i 



22 " INTRODUCTION 

thought is essentially 'ideological', proletarian thought is essen-; 
tially 'Utopian', while bourgeois thought is a transition between, 
the two: |l 

'Conservative thought concentrates upon the past in so far as: 
the past lives on in the present; bourgeois thought, essentially 
devoted to the present, takes its nourishment from what is new 
now; and proletarian thought tries to grasp the elements of the 
future which also exist in the present, by concentrating upon thos 
present factors in which the germs of a future society can be seen 
{Archiv, vol. 57, p. 102). 

The emergence of a conservative 'style of thought' is inter- 
preted, then, primarily as an incident in a vast process of social 
polarization. This category of 'polarization' ^vill play a decisive role 
in Mannheim's sociology of kno^vledge from here on, although, 
as we shall see, the harshness with which it is put here becomes 
considerably mitigated later on. At this point, at any rate, the 
latest period of modern history appears as that of polarization. 
,. ^ All human aspirations are more and more forced into partisan 
channels; the individual is increasingly faced ^vith the necessity 
of making a choice among the contending groups which claim 
his allegiance. Our age is, in a way, that of lost innocence. Naive, 
non-self-conscious thinking is no longer possible; everyone has to 
render account for himself and analyse his own thinking in terms 
of its practical, political, group implications. 

7 
The essay on Generations (1927) deals with a problem closely 
related to that oHtTie^'styles of thought' or 'standpoints' figuring 
so prominently in the argument of historicism. According to 
historicism, the most important thing about the works of the 
human mind is that they can be 'dated': we cannot understand 
them except by relating them to the period in which they origin- 
ated. If we refine this analysis, we shall be faced with the problem 
of the generation as a historic unit. For it is not only possible to 
'date' a certain work as belonging to a certain period; ^vithin 
one and the same period, one can distinguish the works of the 
older generation from those of the younger. Here, then, we see 
concrete groups which in a Avay determine styles of thought and 
action; and yet, it cannot be said that it is 'interests' or 'common 
socio-political aspirations' that give the members of the same 
generation a common orientation. Thus, the concept of generation 
confronts the sociology of knowledge with a difficulty: other than 
/ 'sociological' factors, after all, seem to be responsible for certain 
characteristic modifications of thought. 



DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 23 

Two types of explanation, both outside the orbit of the sociology 
of knowledge, seem particularly plausible; one is the 'jpositivistic', 
the other the 'romantic-metaphysical' one. According to the 
positTvIsTTc conception, generation is simply a brute, natural fact; 
morlbver, the concept of generation is essentially a quantitative, 
measurable concept. The romantic-metaphysical school, on the 
other hand, sees in the various generations concrete 'entelechies' 
that may be grasped by intuition but cannot be subjected to any 
rational analysis. 

Here again, Alannheim wages a war on two fronts. To be sure, 
the positivist analysis is insufficient, for each generation produces 
something unique that cannot be deduced from the mere natural 
and statistical facts of biological age and youth. But the 'entelechy' 
concept is also unacceptable, because it precludes any scientific 
analysis. And German thinking is unfortunately addicted to 
irrationalism; it ignores the fact that 'between the natural or 
physical, and the mental, there is a level of existence at which 
social forces operate' (p. 284). The problem of generations, too, 
must be solved by sociological analysis. 

The analysis itself proceeds along lines reminiscent of Leopold 
von Wiese's approach, whose theory of 'social relationships' at 
that time began to influence German sociological thinking. What 
kind of 'social relationship' underlay the particular social phenom- 
enon of an age group? Obviously, a generation was not a 
'concrete group' (p. 288) : it had neither a visible organizational 
framework nor a vital 'community' character like a family. 
Nevertheless, 'belonging to the same generation' determined cer- 
tain facets of the behaviour and thinking of a number of indi- 
\iduals; these individuals acted and thought in a certain way 
because they occupied the same place in a 'structural' whole. So, 
here again, our analysis must be a 'structural' one (see above, 
p. 9) : certain forms of thinking and action have to be analysed in 
terms of the place they occupy within a dynamic process. Mann- 
heim introduces here the term Lagerung ('location') to denote 
common features exhibited by certain individuals, not by 
conscious choice, but merely by virtue of being placed 'here' 
rather than 'there' along a continuum. In this, 'generation' is 
analogous to 'class', Mannheim says (p. 289). The members of the 
same age group will show certain similarities merely because their 
crvicidil first experiences put them in contact with the same things. 
At a given time, older and younger age groups in a society 
experience the same events, but the effects of these events will be 
different, depending on whether one experiences them 'point- 
blank' or against an already formed background of experience. 

Even so, Mannheim asserts, the mere fact of belonging to the 



24 INTRODUCTION 

same age group does not in itself determine the whole orientation 
of a number of persons. First of all, there will be nothing common 
to members of the same age group unless they also belong to the 
same culture and the same society: 'generation' is superimposed 
upon other, historical and cultural, factors. Moreover, even within 
one historical community, the same age group may be split up 
into sharply differentiated sub-groups, e.g. along political or class 
lines; this is what we have to expect in times of social struggle. 

/The various age groups then become polarized into antagonistic 

xgencration units'. 

Thus, the analysis of generation phenomena again culminates 
in a concept of polarization. At a given time, all or nearly all of 
the literati may belong to one of these polarized 'generation' units; 
we then shall have the impression that the period in question is 
wholly 'romantic', or wholly 'rationalist', and so on, and, moreover, 
that it was our literati who put their stamp upon their age by dint 
of sheer genius. This, however, is an illusion, according to Mann- 
heim; the 'generation units' antagonistic to the dominant trend 
have also been there all the time, even if — for some reason — they 
cannot always become vocal. At any rate, the 'decisive impulses' 
do not originate with the literati themselves, but 'with the much 
more compact, mutually antagonistic social groups which stand 
behind them, polarized into antagonistic trends' (p. 317). 

A word about the 'socially unattached' intellectuals. In the 
essays about Conservative Thought and Generations, this social 
category does not yet play the role of a seeker after a 'dynamic 
synthesis', a 'total perspective' overcoming the one-sidedness of 
the various party platforms, as it does in Ideology and Utopia 
(p. 143). At this point, polarization still reigns supreme; the 
intellectual can do nothing but rally himself to one of the 'poles'. 
It is only later that he acquires a role proper to himself, that of 
effecting a synthesis. 



The gradual working out of a synthesis among antagonistic 
positions, rather than merely a process of polarization, appears 
as the essential content of the historical process in the lecture on 
'Competition as a Cultural Phenomenon,' delivered at the Sixth 
Congress of German Sociologists (publ. 1929). In this lecture, 
Mannheim passed in review the main categories of his sociology 
of the mind. Sociological analysis, he said, was called upon to deal 
with 'existentially determined' thinking, as contrasted with the 
abstract, neutral type of thinking encountered in the natural 
sciences. This 'existentially determined' thinking cannot be under- 






DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 25 

stood as merely 'mirroring' the world without any practical 
afterthought. Actually,_all existentially determined thinking is the 
reflection of some social aspiration; 'theories' about society, 
history, man as a whole always have a 'volitional', practical, 
political basis: 

'One runs far less risk of going astray if one proposes to explain \ 
intellectual movements in political terms than if one takes the 1 
opposite course and from a purely theoretical attitude projects a 
merely contemplative, internal, theoretical thought pattern on to 
the concrete, actual life process itself (p. 212). 

The_jyarious philosophies, then, express different political 
positions. Which philosophy is to be the dominant one of a society 
is one of the chief objects of the social struggle within that society. 
Every group has its own interpretation of the world, and seeks 
to make it the universally accepted one. Thus, theoretical dis- 
cussions may be conceived of as incidents of tlie general struggle 
for power (p. 198). When social power is monopolized by one^f^ 
group, then one world interpretation reigns supreme; no contrary 
position to the officially prevailing one is allowed to be expressed. 
However, monopolies of power inevitably break do"UTi some time; 
when they do, rival theories and interpretations of the world 
begin to compete among each other. 

Mannheim distinguishes several types of intellectual competi- 
tion; in particular, he says, an 'atomistic' phase is followed by a 
phase of 'concentration' in which the competing theories increas- 
ingly cluster around a few poles of power and influence. This is 
the picture of 'polarization' familiar from the two preceding 
essays; but now our author points beyond mere polarization, in 
the direction of a dynamic 'synthesis' to be sought as the possible 
outcome of the interplay of the various competing positions. Such 
a 'synthesis' is the closest one can get to 'absolute' truth, since it 
really embodies all aspirations, all world interpretations existing 
at a given time. In the synthesis, one can approximate as much as 
possible to the ultimate content of the historic process. Beyond 
that, nobody can go. 



In the paper on Competition, Mannheim raised the question 
of how intellectual life depends on the distribution and forms of 
power in a given society. This way of putting the question is 
reminiscent of Max Weber's sociology. The next paper, with the 
discussion of which we shall conclude this survey, Economic 
Ambition (1930), shows an even stronger influence of Weber. This 
paper differs from the earlier ones in that it does not deal with 



26 INTRODUCTION 

'styles of thought' and with the question of the 'validity' of'' 
existentially determined thinking at all, hut radier with. !ideal 
types'^of action, of human endeavour. Jjl a_yery broad sense, 
however, this paper also can be said to be concerned with the 
'sociology of knowledge', since its purpose is to show how the life 
plans of individuals depend on the sociological structure of the 
groups .to which they belong. 

The paper begins on a note which is entirely new in Mann- 
heim's writing; he raises the question of a sociological theory of 
education. (Later, after his moving to England, the problem of 
education will become one of his main interests.) He notes that 
contemporary education is out of touch with social reality. Our 
society is an industrial one, and this urban, industrial civilization 
shapes men's chances and expectations in a characteristic way; 
yet education speaks only about abstract principles and ideals; 
it does not prepare young people for what they will have to do in 
order to acquire for themselves a place within the industrial 
society. What is needed would be an education that would 
make the pupil adjusted to actual social reality, and even more 
than that: one that would enable him to transform that reality 
and to raise it to a higher level (p. 233). 

All this introduces an analysis of the various forms of 'success' 
men can achieve in differently structured societies. What are the 
opportunities open to individuals in various social settings? 
Different cultures value different achievements: in certain 
societies, the warrior is the supreme type; in others, economic 
success primarily determines status. It is shown, with the help of 
Weberian categories, that economic achievements have a larger 
component of 'rationality' and calculability than, say, military 
achievements; and also that societies in which status depends 
primarily on economic success gradually eliminate other forms of 
status differentiation. Instead of the immobility of closed caste 
systems, they will show a certain amount of vertical mobility. 
Since the economic mechanism itself ensures a certain 'orderly' 
interplay of functions, other control mechanisms are more and 
more abandoned : the 'ideological' sphere becomes more and more 
unregulated. It is no longer vital for social stability that all indi- 
viduals should think alike about matters of principle, like morality 
and religion, since no matter what they 'think', they are com- 
pelled to act, by virtue of the structure of society itself, in an 
orderly and co-operative way. Spontaneous motivations become 
relatively less important. 

As with Max Weber, 'bureaucracy' represents the apex of 
'rational' organization. Within the bureaucratic sector, achieve- 
ment is measured in quantitative terms, and even advancement 



M 



CRITIQ,UE OF MANNHEIM'S SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 27 

is predetermined as to its tempo and degree. Creative impulses 
cannot be satisfied in one's life's work; they become relegated to 
'leisure'. 

The different areas of modern industrial society determine 
different types and forms of ambition. Mannheim seeks to demon- 
strate here an extreme case of the dependence of 'thinking' on 
objective social reality: man is not free to form his life wishes and 
ambitions in a purely personal, individual way; his objective 
position in society determines what his ambitions can be. This 
insight, however, should not cripple ambition, Mannheim says. 
For in cases where existing reality would only offer frustration 
rather than real satisfaction, man can undertake to change that 
reality. This, however, is impossible as long as man is guided by 
ajDstract maxims, unrelated to social reality. One cannot liberate 
man by harping upon human freedom in general, but only by 
'exact observation of the field of activity within which freedom 
can be exercised' (p. 275). Education should be so transformed 
as to prepare men for this highest task. 

As a theory, sociology of knowledge seeks to show that all 1 1 ^ 
humarT'thiiiking and action is determined by social forces; but the ' ,-^ 
theory calls for a practical application through which these forces 
themselves can be acted upon — by 'free' agents. The application 
is, in the first place, in the field of education. Education should 
enable man to make use of a 'freedom' which is non-existent as 
long as it is defined only in general, abstract terms. Thus, the 
survey of this process of the working out of the categories of 
Mannheim's sociology of knowledge leads us to a strange con- 
clusion : the demonstration of the dependence of thought on social -^i^ 
reality serves to open a road to freedom. 



IV. CRITIOUE OF MANNHEIM S SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 



Undertaking to demonstrate that human thought is determined 
by objective factors, such as social reality, is a hazardous enterpriseiTi 
For if we hold such a theory, we risk exposing ourselves to the 
objection that the theory itself, being an element of thought, 
is the product of objective social forces which have been shaping 
our thinking. This being so, however, is it not pointless to discuss 
the theory on its merits? If your consciousness happens to be 
subject to the same determining influences as mine (I being the 
proponent of the theory), you will agree with me; if it happens to 
be differently conditioned, you will disagree. But it would be sheer 
waste of time to put forward arguments for or against the theory; 



28 INTRODUCTION 

either of us must think it either true or false, but we are both 
mistaken, for neither of us can have any true or false beliefs: 
we must think along certain lines, and that is all. The theory 
itself makes it impossible to accept it on its merits or even to 
argue for it. 

Most of Mannheim's critics actually used this argument 

against him, and his, formulation of his theory greatly facilitated 

this mode of attack. For he did not speak merely of socially or 

existcntially determined value judgments or emotionSj^but quite 

pointedly labelled his theory as a sociology of knowledge^ What he 

was interested in demonstrating as being determined by social 

factors was factual knowledge of a certain kind which he refused 

to consider as being separable from values. Such an attitude was 

quite bewildering. What did Mannheim really mean? 

/ According to H. Otto Dahlke,i Mannheim first posited the 

I 'ideological' nature of all thought and then concluded, by an 

\ 'unpardonable non sequitur\ that 'all thinking is false' (p. 83). 

'It is not to be denied that a consideration of the origin of an 
idea or even placing it in a wider context and under different 
perspectives is fruitful for its understanding, but to impeach its 
validity thereby, or even imply a "relative" validity, is a gross 
non sequitur' (p. 84). 

This argument, however, does not seem to me to hit the mark. 
For Mannheim's purpose was not to 'impeach the validity' of 
socially determined knowledge; on the contrary, he took the 
greatest pains to demonstrate that such knowledge was valid and 
legitimate, even though it could not be considered as 'verifiable' 
by positivist standards. Nor did Mannheim argue simply from 
the existence of disagreement among men; his point was that 
each period had to re-write history to do justice to insights which 
were not attainable before. 

A second point made by Dahlke, however, points to a real 
logical difficulty inherent in theories of the social determination of 
knowledge : 

'The notion of relativism or relationism, as developed by 
Mannheim, is self-contradictory, for it must presuppose its own 
absoluteness. The sociology of knowledge . . . must assume its 
own validity, if it is to have any meaning' (p. 87). 

A similar point was made by Ernst Griinwald.^ Griinwald saw 
that Mannheim's thesis of the 'existcntially determined' nature of 

' In: Harry Elmer Barnes, Howard Becker and Frances Bennett Becker, 
Contemporary Social Theory, New York (Appleton-Century), 1940. 

2 Cf. Das Problem einer Soziologie des Wissens, Wien-Leipzig, 1934, pp. 184 ff. 



CRITIQUE OF MANNHEIM'S SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 29 

thinking did not sei've to demonstrate that 'all thinking was false'. 
Mannheim, Griinwald said, rejected the integrally 'sociologistic' 
thesis that 'by showing a judgment to be existentially determined 
one destroys its claim to validity' (p. 183). However, his attempt 
to establish a 'middle position' between timeless validity and total 
falsehood embroiled him in a contradiction, for 'it is impossible 
to make any meaningful statement about the existential determin- 
ation of ideas without having an Archimedean point beyond all 
existential determination' (p. 206). 

'No long argument is needed to show beyond doubt that this 
version of sociologism, too, is a form of scepticism and therefore 
refutes itself. For the thesis that all thinking is existentially 
determined and therefore cannot claim to be true claims itself to 
be true' (p. 229). 

'The "middle position" between relativism and absolutism 
which Mannheim's relationism claims to occupy is nothing but 
an illusion. "Relationism" and "absolutism" are mutually contra- 
dictory' (p. 232). 

What Griinwald says is not that Mannheim wanted to argue in 
favour of scepticism, but that his own theory, although pur- 
portedly non-sceptical, actually implied scepticism with all its 
self-contradictions . 



I think that any theory which asserts that all thinking is totally 
determined by social factors is effectively destroyed by this argu- 
ment. Mannheim, of course, did not apply his theory to 'all' 
thinking, since he actually excepted mathematical and natural 
science from his verdict of 'existential determination'. But this 
is irrelevant in the present context; what we are concerned with 
is historical and related knowledge, and that, Mannheim said, 
was both 'knowledge' and 'determined by social factors'. This, 
however, does seem to imply a contradiction — as long as we mean 
by 'existential determination' a kind of total determination of a 
causal type which leaves no room for freedom or argument. 

But did Mannheim have such a rigid 'social determination' in 
mind? It does not seem so. Unfortunately, he never clarified what 
kind of 'determination' he had in mind. One may only infer from 
his general way of arguing that to him, rigid causal determination 
was itself a 'static', 'natural science' category, quite inapplicable 
to such a 'dynamic' entity as the mind. We have to remember 
that the factor Mannheim assumed to play the role of determinant 
(or 'co-determinant') was 'history', and that history itself was a 



30 INTRODUCTION 

'meaningfur process. The mind was 'determined', then, not by 
some brute, meaningless force, but by something which itself 
represented meaning. We have to think in this connection, I think, 
not of causal 'determination' of the familiar kind, but rather of 
the way in which a question 'determines' an answer: the question 
effectively delimits a range within which meaningful answers are 
"possible, but the respondent must find the answer himself; he 
must both understand the question and be capable of finding the 
right answer. This simile, of caurse, is merely an approximation 
to Mannheim's position; 'history* is more than a questioner. It 
also 'prompts' the answer, in a way; moreover, the theory also 
stresses a number of contingent factors on which thought processes 
depend. Its main purport, however, is that by being immersed in 
the historic-social process, by utilizing the chances it affords for 
insight, the subject achieves a kind of 'truth' that cannot otherwise 
be attained. The various interpretations of the world 'prompted' 
by history are not meaningless, automatic responses. It is possible 
to argue about their merits; and in case of doubt or controversy, 
we may appeal to history itself, especially to 'structural' facts 
about its dynamic flow which indicate, at each moment, which 
position is 'genuine' and ^vhich is out of tune with the substance 
of history. The various 'perspectives' differ in cognitive value: 
some are more 'partial', less 'genuine' than others, and it is sheer 
'fate', brute fact, contingency that determines everyone's per- 
spective for him. But it is possible to work toward a synthesis 
from each perspective, and the sociology of knowledge is meant 
precisely to help toward this. (If one finds out what the bias 
inherent in his perspective is, he can discover the 'trutji' contained 
in the moving structure embracing all perspectives. ^The theory 
1 of the social determination of thought thus serves to' enhance the 
objective validity of truth. 



But the enterprise of demonstrating this 'social determination' 
is still hazardous. For if we escape the objection that the theory 
destroys itself, we immediately face another one: namely, that the 
theory in its new garb is completely metaphysical. Indeed, what 
makes 'existentially determined' knowledge valid is that it has 
been attained in communion with the 'historical process' itself 
which is conceived of, in some way, as representing absolute truth. 
The communion with this absolute truth-in-history cannot be 
complete and final, but it does constitute 'knowledge' of a special 
kind — and this type of knowledge is different from that achieved 
by natural science. In this connection, too, Mannheim was quite 
uncompromising: he rejected the suggestion that historical reality 



CRITIQUE OF MANNHEIM'S SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 31 

could be 'known' in the same way as natural objects get to be 
'known'. Thus, if his theory escapes the logical objection of self- 
contradictoriness, it courts the methodological one of meta- 
physical arbitrariness. This is the dilemma facing the theory of 
the 'social determination' of thought.\'Existentially determined' 
thought, as defined by Mannheim, is either too rigidly 'deter- 
mined' or too uncontrollably free to be called 'knowledge'. 
Is there any way to escape from this dilemma? 

Mannheim saw the dilemma, but he held that it existed only 
as long as one insisted upon defining 'truth' in a narrow, 'static' 
way. If the only truth attainable by man was the truth of proposi- 
tions stated once and for all, and verifiable by anyone, then 
'socially determined' thinking was cut off from truth — and history 
became something unknowable and irrational. But if one accepted ^ 
the thesis that 'truth' consisted essentially in some pragmatic / 
character of one's response to reality — 'being in truth' rather than / 
'speaking the truth' — then the difficulty vanished: the truth! 
attainable to man was shown, at the same time, to be the truth ) 
expressing the essence of historical reality. J 



There is, in part, an unresolvable philosophical difference 
involved here: the difference between the existential concept of 
truth as 'being in truth', and the Aristotelian concept of truth as 
'speaking the truth'. Some philosophers adopt for themselves the 
first definition (as Mannheim did), and others the second — 
knowing, however, if they are true philosophers, that either 
concept of truth somehow needs to be supplemented by the other. 
I shall not go into these philosophical mysteries here, but raise, 
rather, a more 'practical' problem: What are the consequences for 
social thought and action if they are squarely put on the basis of 
the existential concept of 'being in truth'? Today we see that the 
existential definition of truth involves great dangers which were 
not apparent to the same degree when the framework of Mann- 
heim's theory was elaborated. He himself, overwhelmed by the 
sudden and traumatic self-revelation of historical 'reality' which 
was the common experience of the front generation of the First 
World War, accepted as an axiom the organic unity and the 
creative and progressive character of the historical process. Fox 
him, 'historicism' was a progressive and human doctrine; he did 
not see that the 'emerging and actual' in history could be 
essentially and totally non-progressive. To us, it has been demon- 
strated since that pragmatically adequate (successful) response to 
historic reality, even if accompanied by a subjective feeling of 



32 INTRODUCTION 

'truth' and of communion with the Absolute, can be profoundly 
negative and pernicious for man, so that a yardstick beyond 
history is in fact indispensable. Social theory, too, needs such 
yardsticks: it cannot rely on historical structure alone for illumin- 
ation. 

Still, Mannheim's sociology of knowledge is profoundly 
relevant, because no amount of methodological purism can relieve 
us of the task of accounting for the historical process as a whole 
and as defining our relationship to our culture. If we re-formulate 
the problem of the sociology of knowledge as that of the insight 
which participants in a process of social interaction can have into 
that process, it will appear to constitute one of the vital areas of 
research. 

Paul Kecskemeti. 



CHAPTER II 

ON THE INTERPRETATION OF 
IVEL TANSCHA UUNG i 

I. THE PROBLEM OUTLINED 

IN the following study wc shall try to give a incthodologica) 
analysis of the concept of Weltanschauung and to determine 
its logical place within the conceptual framework of the cultural 
and historical sciences. It is not our intention to propose a 
substantive definition of Weltanschauung based upon definite 
philosophical premises; the question we should like to answer is 
rather the following: What kind of task is a student of a cultural ,' 
and historical discipline (a historian of art, of religion, possibly 
also a sociologist) faced with when he seeks to determine the ^ 
global outlook ( Weltanschauung) of an epoch, or tp trace partial J 
manifestations back to this all-embracing entity?,. Is the entity 
designated by the concept of Weltanschauung given to us at all, 
and if so — how is it given? How does its givenness compare with 
that of other data in the cultural and historical disciplines? But 
even this is not the whole problem. Many things are 'given' of 
which no clear theoretical account can be rendered. And now 
we ask: provided that something like the 'global outlook' is 
already grasped — as we shall see — in pre-theoretical fashion, is 
there a way to transpose it into scientific and theoretical terms? 
fCaii such a 'given' pver become the object of valid, verifiable 
scientific knowledge? N 

The problem we have raised is not a matter of gratuitous 
speculation; it is constantly cropping up in actual research on 
cultural and historical subjects, and some attempts at solving it 
are already on record. We shall try to elucidate the methodological 
principles by which endeavours of this kind are guided. 

To be sure, the historical disciplines within which this problem 

^ Vixs\.Y>^h\ii[\Qdin Jahrbuch fur Kunstgeschichte,\-o\. i (XV), 1921/22; Vienna, 
1923. 

E.S.K.— 3 33 



34 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

arises are not yet advanced far enough to permit us to attempt a 
final answer. All we can do now is to make explicit the logic 
behind the actual procedure followed by a few selected scholars, 
to evaluate the logical achievement involved in their attempted 
solutions; in conclusion, we shall at least touch upon the wider 
problems involved. 

II. THE STRUGGLE FOR A SYNTHESIS 

\ Is it possible to determine the global outlook of an epoch in 
an objective, scientific fashion? Or are all characterizations of 
such a global outlook necessarily empty, gratuitous speculations? 
These questions, long neglected, are again attracting the interest 
of scholars. This is not surprising in view of the strong urge 
towards synthesis noticeable in the various historical disciplines. 
Following a period of limited analytical research and of increasing 
specialization, we are now witnessing the onset of a period charac- 
terized by a s)aioptical approach. The preceding concentration 
upon analytical historical research had been a much-needed 
reaction against Hegel's venture in the philosophy of history 
which, \vith its ready-made assumptions, had pro\Td premature 
in content and method alike; and at the same time it provided a 
wholesome contrast with a stream of 'universal histories' which, 
though they made interesting reading, fell hopelessly short of 
scholarly standards and presented an uncritical mixture of 
incongi'uous viewpoints, methods, and categories. 

This premature syTithesis had to give way before the better 
judgment that, while the ultimate object of historical research 
obviously is the historical process as a whole, no knowledge of the 
global process is possible without a previous investigation of its 
parts. These component parts, then, had to be studied first in 
isolation; this led to a process of specialization which is still going 
on. Specialization was t\\ofold. For one thing, various cultural 
fields such as science, art, religion, etc., were isolated from each 
other and studied separately. ^ Secondly — and this is what we are 
primarily interested in — the isolated domains into which the whole 
of culture \vas split up \vere not viewed integrally as they present 
themselves in pre-theoretical experience, but subjected to various 
operations of abstraction, performed from a number of different 
theoretical points of \'iew. This procedure — which had already 
been employed successfully in the natural sciences — proved 

1 Perhaps it ought to be emphasized that such a sharp delineation of the 
domains of religion, art, etc., is strictly a product of the theoretical approach to 
culture. The active participant in the culture experiences no such sharp 
divisions. 



THE STRUGGLE FOR A SYNTHESIS 35 

methodologically fruitful in the cultural disciplines as well; it 
made it possible to ask questions capable of generalization and to 
form well-defined concepts; as a result, the logic of the cultural 
sciences which we shall have one day will be in a position to assign 
'each term used in these sciences its exact logical place, that is, to 
specify the problem in the framework of which alone the term in 
question has a meaning. 

The foremost result of this second kind of specialization was — 
as in the case of the natural sciences — that the consistent and uni- 
form application of specific abstractive procedures in the various 
specialized cultural disciplines led to each discipline constituting 
Tts own object, so to speak, by virtue of its method. Just as the 
'physical object' of science is totally diflferent from the object of 
immediate everyday experience and is constituted, one might say, 
by the method of physics, so, for example, 'style' (to take an ex- 
ample from aesthetics) also is a novel kind of object, brought into 
being by the methodical analysis of stylistic historical studies; 
scientific abstraction, gradually discarding all those aspects of the 
multiplicity of works and art forms which are not relevant to 
this problem, finally brings forth, as it were, the entity called 
'style'. 

Far more important, however, is it to note that, despite this 
similarity, the human studies also differ essentially from the 
natural sciences when it comes to the relation of their respective 
logical objects to the corresponding objects of pre-scientific, every- 
day experience. The empirical object given in the concrete 
fullness of actual sensual experience presents no problem for the 
logic of physics, since all physical laws can be expressed without 
reference to the global content of that sensual experience, so that 
physics need never concern itself with the task of reconstructing 
the concretely given object in terms of its own concepts, evolved 
as a result of methodical abstraction. For aesthetic analysis, 
however, the object as given in pre-theoretical, concrete experience 
never ceases to be a problem. In studying the historical evolution 
of styles, we may temporarily ignore the content and form of the 
individual works of the periods under investigation; we may 
neglect what is uniquely expressive in this or that work, and 
consider it merely as a point of passage in a process of transforma- 
tion, reaching forward and backward beyond it in time — 
precisely what we call 'style'. But all the unique elements of form 
^d content which we neglect when our interest is focused on 
'style' nevertheless remain a problem to be solved by the history 
of art as such. Once the domain of 'nature' has been split up into 
the fields of physics, chemistry, biology, etc., each studied by a 
specialized discipline, the problem of putting together these 



36 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

partial fields to reconstruct a unified whole no longer arises as a 
scientific problem (only a 'philosophy of nature' i might con- 
ceivably have such an aim), whereas for the cultural sciences, the 
concrete experiential wholes neglected in the interests of abstrac- 
tion always remain a problem. Even supposing that in the field 
of art history, comprehensive and logically self-contained surveys 
of the development of style and of subject matter have already 
been worked out, certain experiential wholes necessarily neglected 
as a result of the abstractive procedures involved in these studies 
would still call for scientific treatment; these include the concrete 
'whole' of this or that individual work, the more comprehensive 
'whole' of the csuvre of an artist, and the still more comprehen- 
sive 'whole' of the culture and Weltanschauung of an epoch,. 

There is still another reason why these concrete objects are 
of relevance to the various branches of cultural history. Since each 
of these branches owes its existence to an abstractive operation, 
none can give a full and valid account of its object within the 
limits of its own conceptual framework; it will be necessary at 
some point to refer to the concrete whole itself. Within the history 
of style, for instance, we have certain analytical tools which enable 
us to say how style changes; but if we want to account for the 
cause of the change, we must go beyond the history of style as such 
and invoke some such concept as the 'art motive' {ICunstwollen), 
as defined by Riegl, as the factor the mutations of which explain 
the changes in style. And in trying to elucidate in turn the causes 
of the mutations of the art motive, we must make reference to 
even more fundamental factors such as Zeitgeist, 'global outlook', 
and the like. Bringing these various strata of cultural life in 
relation to each other, penetrating to the most fundamental 
totality in terms of which the interconnectedness of the various 
branches of cultural studies can be understood — this is precisely 
the essence of the procedure of interpretation which has no 
counterpart in the natural sciences— the latter only 'explain' 
things. Thus, even a specialized discipline within the cultural 
^ciences cannot afford to lose sight of the pre-scientific totality of 
<^<^its object, since it cannot comprehend even its narrow topic 
\vithout recourse to that totality. That is the real reason why the 
historical studies of culture could not rest content with a 
specialized, analytic method of research. And the present trend 
towards synthesis is evidenced above all by the awakening interest 

1 Modern philosophies of nature seek to reconcile the explanatory principles 
used by the various sciences (such as the mechanical and causal principles 
used by physics and the teleological ones used by biology). But of course that 
has nothing whatever to do with the trend towards synthesis in the cultural 
sciences of which we spoke above. 



RATIONALISM v. IRRATIONALISM 37 

in the problem of Weltanschauung, a problem that marks the most 
advanced point reached by efforts at historical synthesis. 

This emerging set of questions cannot be treated on its merits 
unless one is ready to emancipate oneself from the methodological 
principles of natural science; for in the natural sciences, where 
problems of this kind are necessarily lacking, we encounter 
nothing even faintly analogous to the thought patterns with which 
we have to deal at every step in the cultural sciences. Yet the 
scientist's way of thinking had fascinated the analytic era to such 
a degree that none had dared as much as broach, let alone offer 
to solve, certain essential questions, for the only reason that they 
did not fit in with the accepted catalogue of sciences or with the 
general pattern of theoretic prejudice. When general questions of 
principle nevertheless came up in research and could not be thrust 
aside, the specialists of the analytic era would unfailingly refer 
them to the experts of some neighbouring field, who in turn would 
promptly pass them on with the identical excuse that it was out of 
place in their particular scheme of investigation. In this perpetual 
game of passing the buck the human studies not only risked in 
fact omitting to answer the most vital questions of their own field, 
but, which is worse, they were courting the danger of overlooking 
the scientific obligation to tackle these problems. 

We now have evidence that the turn towards synthesis is 
actually taking place, for indeed specialists of late evince interest 
in questions of the philosophy of history. This interest manifests 
itself by a growing need to fit particular findings into some global 
historical scheme, and by the readiness to use unorthodox 
methods, such as that of bringing the various strata differentiated 
by abstraction into correlation with each other, of investigating 
correspondences between the economic-social and the intellectual 
spheres, of studying parallelisms between cultural objectifications 
such as art, religion, science, etc. Methodology seeks but to make 
explicit in logical terms what is de facto going on in living re- 
search. 1 ""~ 



III. RATIONALISM V. IRRATIONALISM 

The_diffiiiult and- paradoxical nature of the concept of Weltan- 
schauung^stems from the fact that the entity it denotes lies outside 
the province of theory. Dilthey was one of the first to recognize 

1 In addition to a number of works to be discussed below, we should like 
to refer at this point to certain studies by Alfred Weber, who calls upon sociology 
to effect a synthesis; cf. among others 'Prinzipielles zur Kultursoziologie' in 
Archivfiir Sozialwissenschaften, 1920, vol. 47, no. i. 



38 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

this; cf. his remark: 'Weltanschauungen are not produced by think- 
ing. 'l As far as rationahsm can see, the global outlook of an age 
or of a. creative individual is wholly contained in their philo- 
sophical and theoretical utterances; you need only to collect 
these utterances and arrange them in a pattern, and you have 
taken hold of a Weltanschauung. There are numerous investi- 
gations on record the object of which was to ascertain by this 
method the influence certain great philosophers exerted upon 
poets — for example, Spinoza's influence upon Goethe — and this 
passed for an analysis of Weltanschauung. 

It needed the anti-rationalist movement within the cultural 
/studies themselves, a movement which Dilthey first made a force 
f in Germany, to make people realize that theoretical philosophy 
is neither the creator nor the principal vehicle of the Weltan- 
schauung of an epoch; in reality, it is merely only one of the 
channels through which a global factor — to be conceived as 
transcending the various cultural fields, its emanations — manifests 
..itself. More than that — if this totality we call Weltanschauufig is 
/understood in this sense to be something a-theoretical, and at the 
I same time to be the foundation of all cultural objectifications, such 
as religion, mores, art, philosophy, and if, further, we admit that 
these objectifications can be ordered in a hierarchy according to 
their respective distance from this irrational, then the theoretical 
will appear to be precisely one of the most remote manifestations 
\ of this fundamental entity. As long as Weltanschauung is considered 
/as something theoretical, entire vast provinces of cultural life 
^will be inaccessible to historical synthesis. We could at most 
analyse and compare the minute theoretical content that has 
seeped down into literature, religious dogma and ethical maxims. 
And it is characteristic of this conception of Weltanschauung and its 
appeal that Dilthey himself, the very apostle of the anti-rationalist 
approach to this problem, long remained under its spell and held 
that the plastic arts were outside the scope of the analysis of 
Weltanschauung. 

If, on the other hand, we define Weltanschauung as something 
a-theoretical with philosophy merely as one of its manifestations, 
and not the only one, we can widen our field of cultural studies 
in a twofold way. For one thing, our search for a synthesis will 
then be in a position to encompass every single cultural field. The 
plastic arts, music, costumes, mores and customs, rituals, the tempo 
of living, expressive gestures and demeanour — all these no less 
than theoretical communications will become a decipherable 

^ W. Dilthey, 'Die Typen der Weltanschauung und ihre Ausbildung in den 
metaphysischen Systenmen', p. 86, in Gesammelte Schriften, VIII. Berlin, 1931. 



RATIONALISM v. IRRATIONALISM 39 

language, adumbrating the underlying unitary whole of Weltan- 
schauung. Secondly, in addition to widening the field of studies 
in culturah synthesis, this approach will enable us to look at our 
object from an entirely new side. For we then shall be in a position 
to compare, not only discursive utterances, but also non-discursive 
elements of form; and once we do that, we shall be bound to feel 
that we have come far closer to the spontaneous, unintentional, 
basic impulse of a culture than when we were trying to distil 
Weltanschammg merely from theoretical utterances in which the 
original impulse appears, so to speak, in refracted form. 

Admittedly the price to be paid for this expansion of the 
field and the inclusion of the analysis of form is, as we have 
already indicated, that the entire position becomes more vulner- 
able in principle. The scientific investigation of culture itself 
belon gs to the domain of theory; if, then, the global unity of 
cultui^e is conceived as something a-theoretical, then the gulf 
separating the process of research itself from its object will become 
wider. Once again we find ourselves confronted by the problem 
of rationalism and irrationalism, or better, the question whether 
and how the a-theoretical can be 'translated' into theory; 
this is the central problem of philosophy today, and, as we 
see, it is equally crucial for the methodology of the cultural 
sciences. 

Why is it that this problem, never solved, arises anew again 
and again, manifesting a tremendous power of suggestion? It is 
because it touches upon a fundamental property of human life 
and mind, characterizing man far better than any of the findings 
of anthropological science can do. This fundamental trait is that 
man is the citizen of several worlds at the same time. We possess 
the 7Tpo)Tr] vXt], the primordial stuff of experience, which is 
wholly indeterminate and of which we cannot even say whether it 
is homogeneous, in several distinct forms, as aesthetic, religious, 
ethical experience and also as theoretical awareness. The para- 
jioxical nature of tlieoretical thought, distinguishing it from the 
other forms, consists in this, that it seeks to superimpose a logical, 
theoretical pattern upon experiences already patterned under 
other — for example aesthetic or religious — categories. But if this 
is so, we cannot accept that extreme form of irrationalism which 
holds that certain cultural facts are not merely a-theoretical but 
are radically removed from any rational analysis. Aesthetic or 
religious 'experiences' are not wholly devoid of form; it is only 
that their forms are sui generis and radically different from that of 
theory as such. To 'reflect' these forms and what is in-formed by 
them, without violating their individual character, to 'translate' 
them into theory, or at any rate to 'encompass' them by logical 



40 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

forms, that is the purpose of theoretical inquiry, a process which 
points back to pre-theoretical initial stages, at the level of every- 
day experience; and we cannot help feeling uncomfortable while 
translating the non-theoretical experience into the language of 
theory, since we cannot avoid the impression that the theoretical 
categories are inadequate and distort the authenticity of direct 
experience upon which they are superimposed. Why is it, then, 
that we crave theoretical knowledge of something we have already 
possessed integrally in dir.ect experience unmarred by the intrusion 
of the theoretical interest? Why do we not content ourselves with 
the aesthetic contemplation of the works before us? Why do we 
pass from the attitude of form-perception to that of cognitive 
analysis, an attitude essentially incongruous with the aesthetic 
datum? Why should 'thought' be the universal medium, burdened 
with the thankless role of a tool that is constantly needed and used, 
and yet is constantly despised and reviled? And is it even to 
provide the language in which it can be denounced? 

I All this is remarkable indeed. There must be something to 
tKeory after all, something positive and fruitful; it must achieve 
something else besides chilling the authentic experience with the 
cold blast of reflection — a re-patterning of the original experience, 
by which light is thrown upon it from an entirely new sidej 
Otherwise it would be incomprehensible why the ethical, aesthetic, 
and religious realm (that is, the realm of the a-theoretical) is 
^shot through with elements of theory even in its original, un- 
reflected state. Granted that ethical, aesthetic, and religious experi- 
ences have categories and forms of their own; still it cannot be 
gainsaid that religious experience, even though its mainsprings 
be of irrational character, often finds expression through the 
most elaborate theoretical exercises. And likewise, art, though it 
ultimately addresses itself to 'vision', makes use of media and 
materials having a strong theoretical component. Theorizing, 
then, does not start with science; pre-scientific everyday experience 
is shot through with bits of theory. The life of mind is a constant 
flux, oscillating between the theoretical and a-theoretical pole, 
involving a constant intermingling and re-arranging of the most 
disparate categories of many different origins. And thus, theory 
has its proper place, its justification and meaning, even in the 
realm of immediate, concrete experience — in the realm of the 
a-theoretical. We would like to stress this point quite strongly in 
opposition to the now fashionable belittlers of theory and of the 
rational, and to those unmitigated sceptics who flatly deny 
the possibility of transposing the a-theoretical into theoretical 
terms. 

In so far as that indefinite something, Weltanschauung, is con- 



RATIONALISM v. IRRATIONALISM 41 

cerned, however, it belongs to the realm of the a-theoretical in a 
still more radical sense. Not only that it is in no way to be con- 
ceived of as a matter of logic and theory; not only that it cannot 
be integrally expressed through philosophical theses or, indeed, 
theoretical communications of any kind — in fact, compared to it, 
even all non-theoretical realizations, such as works of art, codes 
of ethics, systems of religion, are still in a way endowed with 
rationality, with explicitly interpretable meaning, whereas 
Weltanschauung as a global unit is something deeper, a still un- 
formed and wholly germinal entity. 

Aesthetic and spiritual manifestations such as works of art and 
religious systems are a-theoretical and a-logical but not irrational 
(the latter is something entirely different from the former). In 
fact, those manifestations are just as much based upon categorial 
forms, forms of meanihg^'as' any theoretical proposition — the only 
difference is that in their case we have to do with a different set 
of basic categories: aesthetic, religious, ethical, etc., rather than 
theoretical ones.i Weltanschauung, however, does not properly 
belong to any of these fields of meaning — to the theoretical as 
little as to the a-theoretical ones — but rather, in a way, to all of 
them; for just this reason, it is not to be fully comprehended 
within any one of them. U nity and totali ty of the concept of 
Weltanschauung mean that we must _go not merely T5eyomf the 

1 It is submitted without further elaboration that for the purposes of this 
study, all objectifications of culture are considered as vehicles of meaning 
{Sinngehilde) . There is no longer any need to labour this point; it is sufficient 
to refer to the works of Husserl, Rickert, and Spranger, among others. 

It was Spranger who first utilized for the purposes of an 'interpretation' 
(Verstehen) of behaviour the unreal, non-psychological 'meaning' of which 
Husserl had given a systematic account in the logical and theoretical sphere, 
and Rickert (whose pluralism we accept in the present study) in all the various 
spheres of culture. (Cf Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, vol. i, Halle, 19 iS- 
Rickert, System der Philosophie, pt. i, Tubingen, 1921. E. Spranger, 'Zur 
Theorie des Verstehens und zur geisteswissenschaftlichen Psychologic' in 
Festschrift fiir Johannes Volkelt, Munich, 19 18.) We take 'meaning' in a much 
broader sense than the above-mentioned authors do, and, as will be seen in the 
sequel, we introduce certain distinctions into this concept, since we are con- 
vinced that even the most elementary problems of interpretation cannot be 
tackled without these distinctions. Topics which may be important for philo- 
sophical analysis (such as the bearing of the problem of the timeless validity 
of values upon the problem of meaning) are quite irrelevant to the theory of 
understanding; the only thing that matters here is that — as we shall try to 
show by means of examples— every cultural objectification is a vehicle of 
meaning as to its mode of being and that it therefore cannot be fully compre- 
hended either as a 'thing' or as a psychic content; culture, therefore, requires 
an ontology which is expanded accordingly. We may then very well ignore all 
platonizing tendencies which colour most of the philosophical attempts at 
analysing the theory of culture. 



42 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

theoretical but beyond any and all cultural objectifications. Every 
cultural objectification (such as a work of art, a religious system, 
etc.), and also every self-contained or incomplete phase of it is, 
under this aspect, really something fragmentary, and the corre- 
sponding totality cannot be supplied at the level of the objectifica- 
tions. For even if we could inventorize all the cultural objectifica- 
tions of an epoch (we cannot, of course, since the number of 
items is limitless) a mere addition or inventory would still fall 
far short of that unity we call Weltanschauung. In order to reach 
the latter, we need a new departure in a different direction, and 
must perform a mental operation which will be described later, 
transcending each objectification as something merely itself. Only 
then will it become part of the totality we are concerned with 
here. And our task now is to define this methodological departure, 
to characterize the decisive step by which a cultural objectification 
can be looked at, as it were, from a new side, and, pointing 
beyond itself, can be seen as part of a new totality beyond the 
cultural objectification level. In themselves the objectifications 
of culture as they immediately present themselves to us are 
vehicles of meaning and therefore belong to the rational (though 
not the theoretical!) sphere; whereas the new totality we are 
seeking lies beyond all realizations of meaning, although it is 
somehow given through them. 

But is it at all possible that something of this kind should be 
given? Can it become the object of scientific inquiry? This is what 
we must now ask — but, for the sake of clarity, we must keep the 
two questions apart. The first question is whether that something 
beyond the cultural objectification level is in fact given to us at 
all. That is: we know that something possessing aesthetic meaning 
is given to us when we approach the work of art in an aesthetic 
attitude, and something possessing religious meaning, when we 
experience the religious objectification in an attitude congruent 
with it; but is something else given to us in addition which we 
can designate as the Weltanschauung, the global outlook behind 
these objectifications? And if so, is there a specific attitude we 
have to adopt to grasp this new datum, an attitude different from 
those which enabled us to capture the original meanings? Can 
we describe the new type of intentional act corresponding to the 
new attitude? 

Not until this question has been answered in the affirmative — 
and that can only be done by phenomenological analysis of the 
intentional acts directed towards cultural objects — shall we be 
in a position to tackle the second problem — that of the way in 
which contents grasped in a-theoretical experience can be trans- 
posed into theoretical, scientific terms. 



WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 43 
IV. Weltanschauung: its mode of presentation 

THE THREE KINDS OF MEANING 

The first question accordingly pertains to the phenomenology 
of the intentional object, 1 and all it asks is whether Weltanschauung 
is a possible object at all, whether, in fact, it is given at all, and in 
how far the way in which it is given diflbrs from that in which 
other objects are given to us. 

An object may be given either immediately or mediately — and 
this alternative is very much to the point here. If given immedi- 
ately, the object is present itself, if mediately, then something 
mediating is present in its stead; and this 'proxy' which might be 
said to take the place of the object proper may play vastly 
different mediator-roles, of which we shall mention two as having 
a vital bearing on the problem under review: the function of 
expression on the one hand, and that of documentation or evidetice on 
the other. 2 

The distinguishing mark of mediate presentation is that a 
datum which is apprehended as being there in its own right can, 
and indeed must, also be conceived as standing for something else 
— and this in one of the modes of mediation or signification 
mentioned above. Accordingly, to find out whether any object 
under discussion (in our case: the global outlook, the 'spirit' of an 
epoch) is at least given mediately, we shall have to see whether 
the works or objectifications which are directly given also point 
beyond themselves — whether we have to transcend them, to 
round them out, if we want to grasp their integral meaning. 

We shall try to show that_ any cultural product can be fully 
understood only on the following conditions: it must first of all 
be grasped as a 'something itself, regardless of its mediator 
function, after whicli its mediating character in the two senses 

1 It will be obvious to anyone familiar with Husserl's work to what extent 
this phenomenological analysis is indebted to him, and in how far his procedure 
has been modified for our purposes. 

2 As a third type of mediation, representation may also be mentioned, but we 
shall not go into it any farther in this paper, since our analysis would be unduly 
burdened by introducing this further dimension. We shall limit ourselves to 
the following remark in connection with this topic which is of primary im- 
portance in other contexts: the sphere in which representation is of prime 
importance is that of painting and sculpture; besides shaping a visual medium 
and 'aesthetic space' (about which more later), a work of art in these fields 
also may represent a number of objects. The essential difference between ex- 
pression and representation is that the representation and the represented 
object must belong to the same sensoiy field. Sounds can be represented only 
by other sounds, optical objects by other optical objects and, in general, 
sensory data by other sensory data; mental and psychic data cannot be repre- 
sented, only expressed or evidenced. 



44 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

defined must also be taken into account. Every cultural product 
in its entirety will, on this showing, display three distinct 'strata 
of meaning': [a) its objective meaning, [b) its expressive meaning, 
{c) its documentary oFevidential meaning. First we have to show 
that these three strata are distinct, and that they are discoverable. 
If we look at a 'natural object', we shall see at the first glance that 
which characterizes it, and the modern scientific attitude appro- 
priate to its study is the fact that it is taken as nothing but itself 
and is fully cognizable without being transcended or rounded out 
in the two directions of which we spoke above, A cultural product, 
on the other hand, will not be understood in its proper and true 
meaning if we attend merely to that 'stratum of meaning' which 
it conveys when we look at it merely as it is 'itself — its objective 
meaning; we have also to take it as having an expressive and a 
documentary meaning, if we want to exhaust its full significance. 
Of course, with Nature too, it is possible to transcend the purely 
experiential attitude, and, attempting a metaphysical interpreta- 
tion, to conceive the whole of Nature as a documentation of God ; 
proceeding in this fashion, however, we merely shift to nature 
V the mode of analysis properly suitable to culture. That, however, 
\ this mode of procedure is alien to the sphere of nature, while it is 
appropriate within the realm of culture, will easily be seen from 
the following negative experiment: if we abstain from transcending 
the objective meaning in the two directions mentioned above, 
the natural object will still be scientifically cognizable, but the 
'cultural product will lose its meaning. 

There is still a second difference between natural and cultural 
objects. The former must be conceived exclusively as something 
located in physical space-time or in the temporal-psychic medium, 
whereas the latter are invariably vehicles of meaning (in the 
several senses just described) and hence are not integrally located 
either in the spatio-temporal world (which is at most the external 
framework of their realization), or within the psychic acts of the 
individuals who create or experience them (these acts being at 
most necessary for the actualization of the meanings) . In so far 
as a cultural object is concerned, its meaning is by no means an 
adventitious index, an accidental property of something in physical 
space, as though the physical were the only real existent and 
the cultural meaning a mere accident. The marble of a statue, 
for instance, merely actualizes a meaning (the work of art as 
such), and the 'beauty' of the statue is not one of the properties 
of the physical object marble, but belongs to an altogether different 
plane. Likewise, the genuineness of the material, 'texture' [stressed 
by Semper], and the treatment of architectural space, are sensual 
data which represent the aesthetic meaning of a material or spatial 



I 



WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 45 

object — but precisely because they embody meaning, they belong 
neither to the material nor the spatial planes themselves. 

To give a still clearer illustration of the 'meaning' character 
of cultural phenomena, and of its threefold differentiation, we 
shall mention a concrete example. And we have deliberately 
chosen a trivial example, so as to make it clear that our concept 
of the 'cultural' embraces, not merely cultural products endowed 
with traditional prestige, such as Art or Religion, but also mani- 
festations of everyday life which usually pass unnoticed — and 
also that these manifestations already display the essential 
characteristics of meaning as such. Take the following case: — 
I am walking down the street with a friend; a beggar stands at a 
corner; my friend gives him an alms. His gesture to me is neither 
a physical nor a physiological phenomenon; as a datum, it is 
solely the vehicle of a meaning, namely that of 'assistance'. In 
this process of interpretation, the event which is mediated by 
visual sense-data becomes the vehicle for a meaning which is 
something entirely different from the visual data and belongs 
to the sociological field, where it is theoretically subsumed under 
the category 'social assistance'. It is only in a social context that 
the man at the corner will be a 'beggar', my friend 'one who 
renders assistance' and the bit of metal in his hand an 'alms'. 
The cultural product in this case is solely the event 'assistance', 
to be defined in sociological terms; in so far as the meaning of 
the event (by which it is constituted as an event) is concerned, 
my friend as a psycho-physical individual is quite irrelevant; 
he enters into the context merely as a 'giver', as part of a 'situa- 
tion' that can only be grasped in terms of meaning and that 
would be essentially the same if his place were taken by any other 
person. 

No knowledge of the intimate content of my friend's or 
the beggar's consciousness is needed in order to understand the 
meaning of 'assistance' (which is the 'objective meaning' of the 
situation); it is sufficient to know the objective social configuration 
by virtue of which there are beggars and people with superfluous 
cash. This objective configuration is the sole basis of orientation 
which enables us to grasp the meaning of the event as one 
exemplifying 'assistance'. 

/Now every cultural product or manifestation has such an 

/^objective meaning, and the distinguishing mark of such a meaning 

is that it can be fully grasped without knowing anything about the 

, 'intentional acts' of the individual 'author' of the product or 

manifestation. All we need know^ is the 'system' (used here in 

1 But it is not required, in turn, that we be able to account for this knowledge 
theoretically and reflectively! 



46 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

a non-logical, a-theoretical sense), that context and whole, in 
terms of which the data we perceive coalesce into a meaningful 
entity. 

In science, this 'objective meaning' is a theoretical proposition, 
and in our sociological example it has at least a considerable 
theoretical component. In the plastic arts, however — as the sequel 
will show in greater detail — the objective meaning is itself a 
purely visual content, the meaning of something that can only 
be seen, or, to use a term of K. Fiedler's, 'pure visibility'. In music, 
again, the objective meaning is melody, rhythm, harmony, and 
the like, all of which have their objective structural laws. These 
structures are 'a-theoretical' but not 'irrational' or 'non-constitu- 
tive' [setziingsfremd) in character. 

However, to continue with the analysis of the example cited, 
it is possible or even probable that when my friend caused an 
event to happen the objective meaning of which was 'assistance', 
his intention was not merely to help, but also to convey a feeling 
of sympathy to me or to the beggar. In this case, the^yent_wMch 
has the objective meaning we indicated will also be the Yghicle 
of an entirely new kind of meaning which need not always^ jiave 
a terminologically fixed designation; in this case, it may be called 
mercy, kindness, or compassion. Now, the perceived movement, 
the gesture of charity, will not merely be endowed with the 
objective meaning 'assistance', but also with a second stratum 
of meaning superimposed, as it were, upon the former: the expres- 
sive meaning. This second type differs essentially from the first 
in that it cannot be divorced from the subject and his actual 
stream of experience, but acquires its fully individualized content 
only with reference to this 'intimate' universe. And the inter- 
pretation of expressive meaning always involves the task of 
grasping it authentically — just as it was meant hy the subject, 
just as it appeared to him when his consciousness was focused 
upon it. 

Now, strangely enough, this expressive content — in spite of the 
fact that we have no theoretical-reflective knowledge of it but 
merely direct, concrete, pre-theoretical experience — is still 
meaning, that is, something interpretable, rather than something 
merely psychic, a diffusely endured state. It has a certain cachet 
(even if it lacks a definite conceptual form), which makes it more 
than an elusive, indistinguishable phase in the flux of our 
consciousness. It must be noted, however, that objective meaning 
can be grasped by objective interpretation without recourse to 
what was subjectively intended, i.e. it can be treated 
as a problem of nothing but meaning — whereas meaning 
as expression, meaning as realized in direct experience, has 



WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 47 

once been a unique historical fact^ and must be investigated 
as such. 

With that, one might think, all possibilities of interpretation 
have been exhausted — but our example shows that this is not the 
case. For I, as the witness who interprets the scene, am in a 
position to go on from the expressive meaning as subjectively 
intended, and from the objective meaning as displayed by the act, 
in an entirely new direction. That is, analysing all the implications 
of what I see, I may suddenly discover that the 'act of charity' 
was, in fact, one of hypocrisy. And then it can no longer matter 
to me in the slightest what the friend has objectively done, nor 
yet what he 'wanted' or 'meant' to express by his action — all 
that concerns me now is what is documented about him, albeit 
unintentionally, by that act of his. And seeing evidence of his 
'hypocrisy' in his gift, I am also interpreting his act as a 'cultural 
objectification', though in a new and vastly different sense than 
before. Whenever a cultural product is grasped not only as 
€2^>ressiYje but also as documentary meaning, it again points 
beyond itself to something different — with the qualification, how- 
ever, that this 'something different' is no longer an intentional 
content actually entertained by my friend, but his 'essential 
cEaracter' as evidenced by his action, and revealed to be, in 
ethical terms, a 'hypocritical' one. Now I can apply the same 
technique of interpretation to every other manifestation of his 
personality as well — his facial expressions, his gestures, his gait, 
his speech rhythm; and as long as I maintain this interpretive 
approach, all his impulses and all his actions will exhibit a new 
stratum of meaning. Nothing will be interpreted in terms of 
consciously intended meaning, or in fefms of objective perform- 
ance; rather, every behavioural datum will serve to illustrate my 
synoptical appraisal of his personality as a whole; and this 
appraisal need not be limited to his moral character — it may take 
his global orientation as a whole into its purview. 

Our first task is to make visible, and to keep apart, the phe- 
nomena relevant in this respect; it must be shown, above all, that 
these techniques of interpretation are always applied in cultural 
analysis, and that especially the last type of interpretation 
exemplifies an indispensable mode of understanding which must 
not be confused with either of the two preceding ones. 

At this point, we have to note the curious phenomenon that 

1 And still it remains something unreal: meaning. We can call it factual 
because it is so intimately tied up with the temporal stream of consciousness of 
a spatially located individual that this nexus enters constitutively into the 
content of the meaning. 'Fact', in this terminology is not the opposite of 
'unreal'. 



\ 



\ 



48 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

we can, on occasion, apply this last mode of interpretation to 
ourselves as well. The expressive-intentional interpretation of our 
own objectifications is no problem for us. The expressive meaning 
we intended to convey in any one of our acts was immediately 
given in the living context — and we can always bring it back to 
consciousness (except, of course, in cases where memory fails us) . 
But the documentary significance of an action of ours is quite 
another matter and may be as much of a problem for us as if in 
our own objectifications we were brought face to face with a total 
stranger. Hardly anywhere is there such a sharp contrast between 
the expressive and documentary interpretation as in this border- 
line-case of 'self-recognition'. And the totality we call the 'genius' 
or 'spirit' (of an epoch) is givciTTo^us in this mode of 'docu- 
mentary' meaning; this is the perspective in which we grasp the 
elements that go to make up the global outlook of a creative 
individual or of an epoch. 

Before discussing the difference between these three strata of 
meaning in more general terms, we shall examine these patterns 
of meaning in the field of the plastic arts; to begin with, however, 
we shall limit ourselves to a clear differentiation between 
objective meaning on the one hand and expressive meaning on 
the other. 

In the theoretical aesthetic analysis of works of art it is custom- 
ary to resort to an abstractive operation, the gist of which is a 
distinction between 'form' and 'content'. We have to ask, then, 
the following question: How does our distinction between the 
three strata of meaning (a distinction, by the way, which also 
requires abstractive operations for its implementation) relate to 
this distinction between content and fo rm? j Does the stratum of 
objective meaning perchance correspond to 'content', with the 
expressive and documentary meanings sharing in the 'form'? 
Nothing of the kind; objective meaning covers an already in- 
formed content, and examination will show that any aesthetic 
'content' in its concrete phenomenal givenness already displays 
several superimposed aspects of form — even though the abstractive 
emphasis upon 'content' usually makes one overlook this. 

If these latter are to emerge clearly, a further distinction is 
required, and to this end the inquiry will have to proceed in 
two stages; this because the distinction between 'form' and 'con- 
tent' can be understood in either of the following two ways : 
{a) the representational content (subject-matter) of the picture 
and its representational form, and (b) the material content, of 
the medium (marble, layers of paint) and its formal dimensions. 

To begin with: it is immediately apparent that any representa- 
tional content combines oJDJective and expressive elements. But 



CX 






WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 49 

even if we try to isolate the representational content as such, we 
shall have to admit that the demarcation line between form and 
content is essentially fluid; for it is impossible to tell the 'story' 
underlying the picture (e.g. a biblical tale, or a village brawl in a 
Flemish painting) so dryly and soberly as to obtain mere content 
into which no 'form' has been injected by the reporter. Even 
newspaper stories are slanted and pointed in such a way that the 
'forming' of the raw material is unmistakable. Thus, even in 
trying merely to describe what the picture 'relates', we cannot 
help noticing in what way the story is told. This 'representational 
form' is exemplified, among other things, by the following aspects 
of the picture: the choice of a particular visual phase of a temporal 
sequence of events; the arrangement of the figures — whether 
hieratically rigid or merely secular in its ordering; whether 
brought about exclusively by effects of lighting, colouring, and 
linear rhythm; whether animated by lifelike gestures or frozen 
in a static design pointing beyond mere lifelike realism; whether 
based upon a rhythmic-architectonic pattern or upon effects of 
intersection and foreshortening; whether presented as seen by the 
outside spectator or organized around a point of reference within 
the picture. All these in-formations of the representational content 
must be considered as objective, inasmuch as they can be ascer 
tained merely by looking at the picture, without reference to 
the artist and his consciousness. 

Nevertheless, the mere inspection of the representational content 
in all these aspects will also reveal an expressive component — 
there is hardly any 'story' without expressive meaning. If the 
Middle Ages as a rule confined pictorial representation to sacred 
contents (derived from the Bible), and, furthermore, to certain 
selected episodes, the reason is, in part, that pictorial art was 
supposed to convey only a limited range of moods and feelings. 
Thus, a certain emotional inventory of selected subjects was 
gradually evolved; particular scenes from the Bible absorbed 
definite emotive connotations into their complex of objective 
meaning (into the events related as such), and these connotations 
became so standardized that the contemporaries could not help 
considering certain expressive meanings as objectively inherent 
in. certain contents. That this cannot be the case in an absolute 
sense is clear from the fact that the same events and figures were 
called upon in the course of history to support many different 
expressive meanings. For instance, certain biblical scenes which 
in early paintings expressed only religious exaltation later on 
came to acquire an 'erotic' expressive meaning. Another well- 
known example of a shift in expressive meaning is that of medieval 
plays in which the blind and the halt play a comic role, whereas, 

E.S.K. — ^4 



50 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

conversely, a later generation took the hero Don Quixote to be a 
comic figure. All this makes it clear that in interpreting expressive 
1^ meaning, including that embedded in a representational content, 
■j we must seek to grasp what the artist actually intended; hence, 
j close familiarity with the attitudes and idiosyncrasies of an epoch 
! or an individual artist is needed if we want to avoid the risk of 
\ seriously misinterpreting his works. 

When we next come to examine the way in which the material 
medium (the marble of the statue, the colour and canvas in the 
painting) is treated, it will also be immediately apparent that 
the visual shapes as such directly embody objective meaning, 
quite apart from any meaning related to the 'story' which is 
represented. When we look at a statue, our visual experience 
embraces not only sense data of sight and (potentially) of touch, 
but invariably also an aesthetic conception [Auffassung) under- 
lying the arrangement of visual shapes purely as such. While we 
think we do not look beyond the purely visual, we already are 
dealing with relationships of meaning and form; in other words, 
the 'space' of the statue is not the same as the 'space' filled by a 
mere slab of marble would be — the statue has its 'aes^thetic space' 
which differs from that of a purely physical space of optics in that 
it is structured in terms of visual meaning. This is further evidence 
that objective meaning need not pertain to the theoretical analysis 
of facts (as the meaning of an act of 'assistance' does), but may 
very well be something purely visual and still amenable to inter- 
pretation in terms of meaning as one of the possible ways of 
imparting aesthetic form to visual space. And this type of meaning 
can again be called 'objective', since all those factors which 
constitute such meaning in a work of art — the treatment of space, 
the mode of composition, etc. — can be grasped without reference 
to the artist's consciousness. Thus, we can have complete under- 
standing of the visual, aesthetic content of primitive African 
^^^"""■^^orks of art without being obliged to analyse what the 'Negro 
artist wanted to 'express' by them. 

There can be no cultural product without some such objective 

Jir' meaning, and without objective visual meaning in particular 

^^ there can be no work of plastic art. To be sure, it needs preparation. 

•if^x^ to understand this objective meaning: a newcomer to art will be 

quite incapable at first of grasping the objective meaning of a 

painting by Cezanne (but on the other hand, it certainly will not 

be the subjective, psychological development of Cezanne which 

can teach him this, but only gradual assimilation of the preceding 

stages in the hierarchy of pictorial devices on which alone 

comprehension can be based) — and yet, all these preliminary 

'learning' stages display a strongly objective orientation. That is. 



WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 51 

they are not merely stages in a purely subjective process of 
experience but show a complete analogy with the process of how 
one comes to understand a theoretical proposition such as 
Pythagoras' Theorem; in this latter case, too, one must first learn 
to understand the meaning of the concepts employed and the 
peculiar structure of the space (in this instance, geometrical space) 
invoh^ed. 

The peculiar way in which plastic art realizes objective meaning 
in a visual medium compels us to distinguish between two types 
of objective meaning in general: the objective meaning realized 
by means of signs, and the objective meaning realized by way of 
form. In both cases, there are concrete vehicles of meaning, but 
the relationship between the meaning and its vehicle is unmistak- 
ably different in the two cases. 

The theoretical meaning — the concept — bears no intrinsic, 
essential relation to its sensual vehicle, the spoken or written 
word; the latter is merely a sign for the former. On. the other hand, 
altliou_gh objective aesthetic meaning, being meaning, is not some- 
thing located in space or in matter, it is yet essentially related to 
the seiisiial medium from which it cannot be detached and to 
which it belongs as its own visual meaning, or form. Objective 
meaning of the kind to be met with in the plastic arts, as form, 
somehow embraces the sensual medium as an essential component 
within the context of meaning, without becoming thereby part 
of the physical world. Visual meaning — what Fiedler calls 'pure 
visibility' — is the meaning of an optical datum and precisely for 
this reason not something optical itself. 

Objective meaning, that is, meaning to be grasped by objective 
interpretation, is rooted in the structural laws of the object itself; 
certain elements and phases of sensible reality here become 
necessary stages in the progressive realization of meaning. All one 
needs for a proper understanding of this layer of meaning is an 
accurate grasp of the necessary structural characteristics of the 
sensual field in question. And indeed, the interpretation of objec- 
tive meaning in art is the one least equivocal and relatively the 
least impaired, as the above-mentioned example of Negro sculp- 
ture has shown, by cultural remoteness and intellectual differences. 

Our phrase, 'relatively the least impaired by cultural remote- 
ness', implicitly concedes that, although objective interpretation 
is~coiicerned only with objective meaning and has nothing to do 
with empathic probing of subjective processes, it still is far from 
presupposing some unique and universally valid 'visual universe' 
— as if the 'aesthetic space' of Negro sculpture were the same, 
qua visual universe, as that of Greek or modern sculpture. Several 
conceptions of space are possible — and as such no doubt amenable 



52 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

to a typology — even within sheer objective visibility, all of which 
have their inner consistency and therefore constitute visual 
universes: any given part of a statue, a distinctive surface, a 
movement, all these gain quite a different visual meaning accord- 
ing to whether they are comprised in this or that 'visual universe' 
— always provided of course, and that is most unlikely, that they 
can be transferred at all from one 'visual universe' to another. 
If these latter are to some extent commensurable, it is entirely 
because they may be considered as variants of 'visual treatment 
of space' as such; a generic concept which is supra-historic in 
that it provides a framework of comparison within which we can 
set off against each other the individual characteristics of the 
various historical visual universes. Because we have such a 
category of visual representation in aesthetic space, because we 
can refer certain instances of hewn stone to an aesthetic 'visual 
universe', we have, as it were, unlimited, ubiquitous access to this 
sph^rc-pf meaning which for this very reason we call 'objective'. 

Now, however, it must be added that expressive meaning too 
is always embedded in this stratum of objective meaning — a form 
within a form, as it were^ And it is the examination of the expres- 
sive meaning of the work of art which will bring out the full 
import of the distinction we made above between objective 
meaning realized by 'sign' and by 'form' respectively. Once we 
make the distinction between sign-meaning and form-meaning, 
it will become immediately apparent that the expressive content 
(usually referred to as the 'emotional' element) caiL.be rendered 
far more adequately through form than through signj Where — as 
in theoretical discourse — the word is merely a sign of an expressive 
content, we can only 'name' it — this verbal designation merely 
refers to it without being able to express it adequately. True 
expression is characterized by the fact that some psychic content 
is captured within a sensually formed medium, endo^ving it with 
a second dimension of meaning; and this capturing of the psychTc 
content is possible only if the sensual medium is not treated as 
something secondary and exchangeable but is given its individual 
fojm valuable in its own right. 

If I tell the beggar 'I am sorry for you,' or if I giv^e him a coin 
as a 'sign' of my sympathy, with a gesture which is purely practical 
and has no aesthetic significance, then I do not, properly speaking, 
express' a feeling — I merely 'name' it, 'refer' to it. But if my 
gesture gives my emotion visual form, then a psychic content I 
experience finds real expression. 

Accordingly, we can already distinguish two radically different 
types on as low a level of expression as that of the gesture: some 
gestures fulfil the function of sign language (e.g. the gestures of 



WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 53 

designating, pointing, blessing, or such conventional manifesta- 
tions as a polite smile), but these can convey only stereotyped 
psychic contents; others have their own individual pattern which 
attracts attention and calls for interpretation. In the latter case, 
each individual pattern of movement conveys a specifically 
unique state of emotion, and then we have to do with a really 
'expressive' gesture. As long as we have only the sign-language 
type of gesture in mind, we may assume that there is a 'universal 
grammar of expression', in terms of which certain movements 
may be put together in rigid combinations which correspond to 
certain typical patterns of emotion. But as soon as we take the 
second category of 'expressive gestures' into account, we shall 
abandon our attempt to construct such a grammar, aware of the 
fact that within this group we have to do with altogether different 
and essentially unique relationships be tween the psvch e and the 
se nsual medium, and that although tlic medium, or rather its 
visual meanmg, is constitutive for the expressjye meaning, it 
would yet be quite unwarrantable to assume' a definite, uniquely 
determinable reciprocal relation between the elements of these 
two strata of meaning. And it is this second kind of expression that 
rnjLtters in art^ inasmuch as the fashioned work of art is quite 
othjr than a mere indication of, or sign for, certain psychic states. 
Rather, each line, each form, in a word: every formative phase \ 
of the medium has at least a double significative function: on \ 
the one hand, it confers upon the medium an objective, visual 
aesthetic meaning or form, and on the other, it also embodies a / 
unique subjective meaning which calls for adequate expression. 

Aesthetic form, as exemplified by a work of art, goes beyond 
a mere expressive gesture in one respect — -to wit, the subject 
performing a spontaneous expressive gesture is not explicitly and 
consciously concerned with the visual shape of the gesture and 
the way in which it conveys expressive meaning, whereas the 
artist's mind has both the shape of the work and its role in con- 
veying expressive meaning as its intentional object. Mimic 
expression is something that happens, but the work of art is made. 
At this point I ought perhaps to make it clear that I am using 
the terms 'awareness', 'consciously held intentional objects', and 
the like, not in the possible sense of having the significant content 
in a definite theoretical and reflective framework, but of a non- 
reflective attitude, even though it be oriented towards theoretical 
meaning. In the case of the artist, this non-reflective attitude is 
one_pf 'making' or 'shaping'; in that of the spectator, it is one of 
'understanding'. Whenever we contemplate the work of art in 
a.direct value-orientation, we perform those acts of realization of 
meaning which the work calls for, but it is only in interpretation 



54 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

that we try to translate this experience of meaning into theoretical 
knowledge. It is quite legitimate, therefore, to speak of the 'in- 
tended expressive content' of a work, provided that 'intended 
expressive content' is to be identified with the intentional object 
in the artist's mind in the second sense of non-reflective awareness 
which has nothing to do with theoretical knowledge. 

That the spectator can grasp the intended expressive content 
of a picture is no less and no more of a miracle in principle than 
the general phenomenon that we can associate the sensual content 
of the work with any kind of meaning-function at all.i Expressive 
meaning also is a 'given'; and if interpretation of this type presents 
peculiar difficulties, it is only because, unlike objective meaning 
(such as, for example, the composition of a picture) which is 
'self-contained and hence ascertainable from the picture alone, 
the expressive meaning embodied in aesthetic elements such as 
the subject matter, the sweep or foreshortening of a line, cannot 
be established without an analysis of the historic background. 
('Changes in emotive significance' are already to be meFwTtli, as 
we saw in connection with early representations of the blind and 
halt, even i^i the more easily comprehensible sphere of subject 
matter.) This difficulty, however, need not induce us to become 
sceptics on principle; all we have to conclude from it is that 
intended expressive meaning is only discoverable by factual 
historical research, i.e. that in investigating it we have 
to employ the same methods as are used in any factual historical 
inquiry. That the intended expressive meaning will not remain 

1 None will dispute this fact except those who approach matters with the 
pre-conceived notion that perception [Aiuchauung) is exclusively a matter of 
sense, without even considering the cjuestion whether it would be at all 
possible to explain the simplest phenomena without recognizing the existence 
of intellectual, or rather categorial, perception (Amchauimg) . In understanding 
the objecti\'e visual meaning (visual configuratioiu) of a statue, tJiis meaning 
must be quite as immediately before me — it must be just as immediately 
perceived by my mind — as the purely sensual elements ('colour', 'glitter', 
'shadow') are at the same time directly perceived by my senses. Equally 
formative, prescriptive of meaning and immediately perceptible to the mind 
are the expressive (and documentarv ) dimensions of meaning in the work of 
art. The 'expressive value' attaching to a colour or combination of colours, 
and the individual cachet they possess, are so much present in aesthetic experi- 
ence that we often notice them before noticing the underlying colour itself 
as such. Meaning, in fact, can only be given immediately; and the only reason 
why we can communicate with each other is that there is such a thing as 
categorial perception of 'meaning', i.e. of something that is not immanent to 
consciousness, something that is de-subjectivized and 'unreal'. Although it is 
true that no meaning can be communicated and understood without a sensual 
medium, the latter alone would never convey it all by itself. The true inter- 
subjective medium is meaning in its proper sense which differs from, and is 
more comprehensive than, the current popular definition of meaning. 



WELTAjYSCHAUUMG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 55 

inaccessible (as may well be the case with Negro sculpture) is 
guaranteed to some extent for those periods and cultures which 
are in a continuity of history with ours. The historical structure 
oFconsciousness itself is guarantee that some understanding of the 
intended meaning may be possible even in respect of works 
remote in time, the reason for this being that the range of emotions 
and experiences available to a given epoch is by no means un- 
limited and arbitrary. These forms of experience arise in, and are 
shaped for, a society which either retains previously existing 
forms or else transforms them in a manner which the historian 
can observe. Since historical consciousness can establish contact 
with works of the past in this fashion, the historian is able gradually 
to make himself at home in the 'mental climate' of the work 
whose expressive intent he is seeking to understand; thus he secures 
the background against which the specific intent of the work, 
the unique contribution of the" individual artist, will stand out 
in sharp detail. 

This analysis of 'objective' and 'expressive' meaning, and of 
thc_vvay in which it is conveyed by subject-matter and by form, 
w^s necessary in order to give us a clearer understanding of 
'documentary' meaning, to which we now shall turn. 

The incorporation and projection of both 'objective' and 
'expressive^ meaning is a matter of conscious effort for the artist. 
By_coritrast^ die third dirn gnsion of meaning — documsxitary 
meaning — is not an intentional object for him. It can become an 
intentional object only for the recipient, the spectator. From the 
point of view- of the artist's activity, it is a wholly unintentional, 
unconscious by-product. 

/^^Vhereas objective interpretation is concerned with grasping 
a completely self-contained complex of meaning — pervading the 
'representation' of the subject-matter as well as the 'shaping' of 
the medium — which is ascertainable from the work alone as 
such, expressive meaning, as we have seen, points beyond the 
work and _j;equires an analysis of the artist's stream of psychic 
experience. ;Now documentary meaning is akin to expressivei 
meaninglST^that it requires us constantly to look beyond the work; 
here, too, we are concerned with the man behind the work — but| 
in an entirely different sense. Expressive meaning has to do with 
a cross-section of the individual's experiential stream, with the 
ejcploration of a psychic process which took place at a certain time; 
<Caoxninientary meaning, on the other hand, is a matter, not of a 
temporal proc'e?s~in which certain experiences become actualized, 
but of the character, the essential nature, the 'ethos' of the subject 
which manifests itself in artistic creation. 

The best way to get this difference clear is to imagine oneself 



56 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

sharing the life of an artist, spending every living minute with 
him, taking part in all his moods and every wish of his, constantly 
occupied with all the things that occupy him — all this without 
ever bothering about documentation. In such a case, one would 
understand the artist's work in the 'expressive' dimension and 
one would have a more or less adequate picture of the latter's 
stream of experience in which one would be a partner — and yet 
one would lack insight into the artist's personality, his Weltan- 
schauujig, his ethos. And conversely, another analyst with scant 
familiarity with the artist's work and actions, but with an acute 
documentary sense, could build upon the little factual material 
at his disposal a complete characterization of the artist's person- 
ality and outlook, not in the psychological but in the cultural 
sense. 

Documentary meaning also is conveyed by 'objectifications' — 
what is 'characteristic' in the documentary sense may again, be 
ascertained from the way in which the subject-matter is selected 
and represented, and from the way in which the medium is shaped. 
And yet in many essential respects things are not the same as 
in the case of expressive meaning. Both are alike in that there 
must be an objective stratum of meaning upon which both the 
expressive and the objective meaning are superimposed. But 
whereas expressive meaning cannot be grasped without taking the 
whole extent of the objective meaning into consideration, that is, 
in other words, whereas expressive meaning is founded upon the 
objective meaning as an integral whole, documentary jneaning 
can be ascertained without considering the work in its entirety; 
in fact, any fragmentary aspect of a work such as a characteristic 
treatment of line, spatial structure,! or colour composition can 
convey documentary meaning: no need to take only concrete, 

^ A good example of documentary analysis of this kind, pursuing documen- 
tary evidence down to the smallest details, is provided by a lecture of Max 
Dvorak's ('tjber Greco und den Manierismus', publ. in Jahrbiich fiir Kunst- 
geschichte, vol. i (XV), 1921/22) from which I quote the following remarks 
about El Greco's 'Funeral of Count Orgaz': 'Gone is the solid spatial organiza- 
tion, since Giotto the sacrosanct foundation of all pictorial representation. Has 
the space breadth? Has it depth? — who can tell? The figures are crowding on 
one another as if the artist had been clumsy about their grouping. Yet at the 
same time the flickering light and the feerie above evoke an impression of 
boundless expanse. The leading principle of the composition is old and simple, 
used hundreds of times before in portraying the Assumption. Tet how is its 
meaning changed, simply because the painter makes the margin cut across the 
figures in the forefront so that nothing is to be seen of the ground and the 
figures seem to spring up somewhere as if by magic . . .' (p. 24; my italics). 

An exposition of the layer of objective meaning in the shaping of both the 
subject-matter and of the medium is immediately followed by a specification 
of the corresponding documentary meaning. 



WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 57 

proper parts of the work into consideration. Expressive meanmg 
is^closely interwoven with the unitary, integrated complex of 
objective meaning; documentary meaning may be inherent in 
de_tachable partial aspects. 

/^ Now after the documentary meaning of one phase of a work 
IS -ascertained, we still need further evidence, in order to make 
the characterization of the man behind the work complete. Such 
evidence, however, will not be sought \vithin one single work or 
one single field of objectification. \Ve rather have to range over 
all comparable realizations of the same producer, in order to 
make him, as it were, take shape before our eyes. This confronta- 
tion of several pieces of evidence is, however, not a matter of 
simple addition — as if one item of evidence were part of a whole 
we are after — a whole which can only be put together by collecting 
scraps of meaning here and there. The peculiar thing is, in fact, 
that in a certain sense one single item of documentary evidence 
gives a complete characterization of the subject; if we are looking 
further, it is in order to ha\'e corroborating instances conveying 
the same documentary meaning in 'homologous' fashion, rather 
than in order to supplement one fragment by others. Further, 
whatever documentary meaning \ve have discovered by analysing 
a partial aspect of a \\-ork can be corroborated only by other items 
of documentary evidence; neither expressive nor objective analysis 
can corroborate documentary interpretation as such. We m ust 
perfqrm^a^ew kind of intentional act, corresponding to this new 
kind of intentional object that documentary meaning is, in order 
to. separate it from the objective and expressive meanings with 
which it is associated. And in the end one ^vill gain the impression 
that he has derived one common documentary meaning from a 
wide range of objective and expressive meanings. This search 
for documentary meaning, for an identical, homologous pattern 
underlying a vast variety of totally different realizations of 
meaning, belongs to a class apart that should not be confused 
\vith either addition, or synthesis, or the mere abstraction of a 
common property shared by a number of objects. It is som ething 
apart becajise the coalescence of different objects as well as the 
existence of something identical pervading an entire range of 
differences is specific to the realm of meaning and intention and 
must be kept uncontaminated by metaphors which have been 
derived at least in part from the ^vorking of spatial and manipu- 
latory imagination. 

Riegl's assertion that the so-called 'negative' ornaments 
occurring in late Roman decorative art manifest the same 'art 
motive' as the one underlying the architecture of the period, and 
his analysis of this 'art motive', so broad in its terms that it yields 



58 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

certain analogies with philosophical systems of the same epoch, 
are good examples of the documentary approach. The analyst 
succeeded in this case, merely by examining a seemingly insignifi- 
cant procedure employed in treating the material mediu^T^n 
putting his finger on something so characteristic that he wasjible, 
by following ujd this hunch, to bring to light the corresponding 
formal traits in other fields of creative activity directly relevant 
to the global outlook of the period. In this instance, the docu- 
mentary meaning was derived from the shaping of the medium, 
but it obviously can be distilled just as well from the treatment of 
the subject-matter; eveiy dimension of the objective stratum of 
meaning may become relevant to documentary interpretation if 
only we are able to discern its documentary import. And njot 
the objective meaning alone but also the expressive meaning 
may be exploited for ' documentary purposes, i.e. made^lp 
yield insights into what is culturally characteristic. The most 
radical procedure — which, however, is applied very frequently in 
practice— may be mentioned briefly at this point. This consists 
in taking theoretical^ utXerances, aesthetic confessions of faith, 
which artists make in order to explain their own formal or_ex- 
pressive goals; these can always be exploited for documentary 
interpretation. This 'documentary' interpretation of an Ars 
poeiica or of an aesthetic theory put forward by an artist does not 
consist, however, in merely treating these utterances as autheuiic 
reflections of the author's artistic personality, of his 'art rnottsie', 
or of the 'spirit' of his epoch. What we have to ask is not whether 
the theory is correct — nor what its proponent 'meant' by it. 
Rather, we must go beyond this 'immanent' interpretation and 
treat the theoretical confession as confession: as documentary 
evidence of something extra-psychic, of the objective 'art mot^ve'^^ 
as a driving force, just as a doctor will take the self-diagnosis of 
one of his patients as a symptom rather than as a correct identj- 
\ fication of the latter's illness. 

All such attempts at documentary interpretation gather the 
scattered items of documentary meaning together in overarching 
general concepts which are variously designated as the 'art 
motive' (Riegl),i 'economic ethos' {'Wirtschaftsgesijinung') (Som- 
bart), 'Weltanschauung' (Dilthey and others), or 'spirit' (Max Weber 
and others), depending on the cultural fields explored. O ne may 
then al:;o define, as a subjective counterpart to these objective 
cultural generalizations, the corresponding historical su bject ; in 

^ Cf. ErM'in Panofsky, 'Der Begrlff des KuiistwoUens' (publ. in Z'^itschrift fiir 
Aesthetik und allgemeine Kunstwissenschaft, vol. XIV, no. 4) wliere an analysis of 
Riegl's concept of the 'art motive' shows a clear understanding of what is 
here defined as docurnentary meaning. 



WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 59 

s ome ca ses_this subject is identified by the name of a historical 
person or collectivity, as when one speaks of the 'Shakespearian', 
the 'Goethcan', the 'classic' spirit. Such names, however, are 
always used in an oblique mode, because what ^ve mean is not 
Shakespeare or Goethe as real persons, but an ideal essence in 
which their works are epitomized. The term 'classic spirit' is less 
misleading in this respect because it does not suggest an existing 
empirical group as its vehicle. ^ 

1 One might ask whether the so-called 'real' subject whose existence is 
presupposed in intentional analysis will not turn out to be a fiction, a mere 
point of reference of configurations of meaning, if we apply this inethod of 
'structural analysis' to it — so that the supposed 'reality' of the other self will 
dissolve itself in mere relationships of meaning. From the point of view of 
structural analysis, there is nothing that prevents this, for in so far as structural 
analysis is concerned, the supposedly real subject of expressive intei-pretation 
is on the same level as the supposedly unreal subject of documentary interpre- 
tation, and can equally be resolved into connections of meaning. Hence, if 
it is nevertheless posited as 'real', there has to be some further experience of it 
which does not pertain to meaning but is altogether ontological and immediate; 
its psychic existence must somehow be accessible to us without being mediated 
by objectively interpretable manifestations or by the manifestations of sub- 
jective experiences which are equally open to interpretation of nieaning. An 
ontological experience of this kind in respect also of the subject of Weltan- 
schauung is professed by those who would have it postulated as a metaphysical 
subject. And so when Hegel or Lukacs talk of 'spirit' they no more think of it 
as a methodological device than would a man who in speaking of Goethe 
would indicate that he imagines being put into communication, through the 
works of Goethe, not only with the latter's 'ideal essence' but with his ontic 
reality. 

cTwo diagonally opposed views can be taken as to_ how other selves present 
themselves to_ us and how they are constituted. The first reduces all our know- 
ledge of the other self to configurations of meaning, and holds that we can 
have access to the psychic reality of the other only through the mediation of 
intelligible [geistig) unreality; Eduard Spranger {op. cit. and Lebensfonnen, 
Halle, 192 1 ) leans towards this view. The second position in turn reduces all 
our knowledge of the other self to intuitive acts directed towards ontic reality, 
disregarding the supra-psychic sphere of meaning as something that can be 
separatedfrom the concrete stream of consciousness; this is the view taken by 
Scheler {Uber den Grund zur Annahme desfreinden Ich, a supplement to Phdnomeno- 
logie und Theorie der Sympathiegefiihle von Liebe und Hass, Halle, 19 13). 

For once the truth seems to be half-way between these extremes. Under- 
standing of another self must start with configurations of meaning. It cannot, 
however, end with it, unless we take 'meaning' in a far wider sense than usual. 
Up to now, the realm of meaning has been taken to include only the theoretical; 
or at most — if one wanted to give it a very broad comtruction — that range of 
phenomena which we designated by the term 'objective meaning'. Thus far, 
nobody thought of 'expressive' and 'documentary' phenomena as phenomena 
of meaning. It should be remembered, however, that if we are to have any 
access to the other subject, it can only be through these dimensions of meaning. 
It is impossible to see how a subject could be constituted out of objective 
meaning alone. But even if we add these two other layers of meaning, we shall 
still fall short of grasping the other subject as a psychic existent. Inferences by 



6o ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

(Accordingly, one would commit the gravest methodological 
erroTlf one simply equated this cultural subject (which has been 
defined merely as a counterpart to an objective cultural gener- 
alization) with empirical collective subjects defined on the basis 
of anthropological or sociological categories, such as race or classi 
And for this reason no documentary interpretation of the kind we 
have in mind can be demolished by proving that the author of a 
work belongs by descent or in terms of status to a 'race' or 'class' 
other than the one whose 'spirit' was said to be exemplified by the 
work. Our formulation shows that we do not object to the investi- 
gation of 'race' as a problem of cultural history, or of 'class' as a 
problem of cultural sociology; surely both topics designate 
problems which deserve to be solved; all we wanted to do was to 
point out certain ruethodological implications which apply to 
these lines of research. Inquiries of this sort employ two sets of 
concepts which the investigator must rigorously keep apart; on 
the one hand, a collective subject will be characterized in terms 
relating to the documentary interpretation of a cultural product, 
and on the other, we shall obtain collective subjects of a different 
sort by using the categories of sciences like anthropology or 
sociology which form their concepts in an altogether different 
fashion. (The concept of class, for instance, is defined in terms of 
an individual's role in the economic process of production, and 
that of race, in terms of purely biological relationships.) Between 
these two kinds of subject — the subject of collective spirit, derived 
from the interpretation of cultural objectifications, and the 
anthropological or sociological subject — the discrepancy due to 
their heterogeneous origin is so great that it seems absolutely 
imperative to interpolate an intermediate field of concepts capable 
of mediating between these two extremes^JThis may be the task 
in the solution of which the interpretive cultural psychology 
{geisteswissemchaftliche Psychologic) initiated by Dilthey will find its 
most fruitful application. Two important studies exemplifying this 
approach were published recently, i 

analogy and 'empathy' are entirely inadequate makeshifts — Scheler has 
proved this much conclusively. The existential postulate of a real other self 
is grounded in an act of immediate intuition: When I look into the eyes of a 
person, I see not only the colour of his eyes but also the being of his soul. 

How and on what epistemological level this apprehension of being takes 
place, and whether it is always associated with an act of interpretation of mean- 
ing or may also be completed in direct ontic communion, these are questions 
we need not pursue any farther, since our topic is not the problem of reality 
with all its ramifications. 

1 Cf. Karl Jaspers, Psychologie der Weltanschauungen, Berlin, 1919. Eduard 
Spranger, Lebensformeri, geisteswissemchaftliche Psychologie und Ethik der Person.' 
lichkeit, 2nd edition, Halle, 192 1. 



WELTANSCHAUUNG: ITS MODE OF PRESENTATION 6i 

But to come back to the distinction between documentary and 
expressive interpretation: it is brought into fresh reHef by the two 
types of subject we have just discussed. Bpih in documentary and in 
expressive interpretation of a work, we may refer to 'collective 
subjects' behind that work; but it is immediately apparent that 
the collective subject \ve mean in the one case is not the same as 
the one we mean in the other. Since we can assign expressive 
meaning only to a real subject or to his stream of consciousness, 
we can construe the 'expressive meaning' entertained by a group 
only in strictly nominalist fashion as the meaning entertained on 
the average by the individual members of the group. The characteri- 
zation of a group in the light of a documentary approach, 
however, is a different matter; for the purposes of such characteri- 
zation, we may well make use of collective subjects which are pure 
constructs, and whose cognitive value consists merely in the fact 
that they serve as the subjective counterpart of the charactero- 
logical units suggested by the documentary interpretation. 

Finally, we should like to mention one further respect in which 
the three types of interpretation differ essentially from one 
another — a difference which, although it does not stem directly 
from the different mode of 'givenness' of the three meanings, may 
ultimately be traced back to it. Unlike the two other t}^es of 
interpretation, documentary interpretation has the peculiarity 
that it must be performed anew in each period, and that any single 
interpretation is profoundly influenced by the location within the 
historical stream from which the interpreter attempts to recon- 
struct the spirit of a past epoch. It is well known that the Hellenic 
or Shakespearian spirit presented itself under different aspects to 
different generations. This, however, does not mean that know- 
ledge of this kind is relative and hence worthless. What it does 
mean is that the t^q^e of knowledge conveyed by natural science 
differs fundamentally from historical knowledge — we should try 
to grasp the meaning and structure of historical understanding 
in its specificity, rather than reject it merely because it is not in 
conformity with the positivist truth-criteria sanctioned by natural 
science. _ 

TcLomderstand the 'spirit' of an age, we have to fall back on 
the 'spiriP~oT our' own — it i&_£nfy^ubstance which comprehends 
substance. One age may be nearer in essence than another to a 
particular era, and the one with the closer affinity will be the 
one whose interpretation will prevail. In historical understanding, 
the nature of the subject has an essential bearing on the content 
of knowledge, and some aspects of the object to be interpreted 
are accessible only to certain types of mind — the reason for this 
being precisely that historical understanding is not timeless like 



62 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

mathematical or scientific knowledge but itself shaped by jhe 
Historic process in philosophical self-reflection. To mention a 
simple example: we may have an entirely different personality 
image of our parents at lo, 20, 30, 40, 50 years of age, but this does 
not mean that there is no such thing as 'the' personality or charac- 
ter of the parents; it only means that at each age level one will 
grasp just that character trait or aspect which is accessible at 
that level, and that the characterization which has the best 
chance of being recognized as most 'comprehensive' (rather than 
'objectively correct') is the one arrived at when the interpreter 
is of the same age as the person characterized. Just as one admits 
this, one will also admit that the temporal process of historical 
understanding, which does not add one item of knowledge_lo 
another but reorganizes the entire image around a new centre in 
each epoch, has positive cognitive value — this t)^e of knowledge, 
in fact, being the only one a dynamically changing subj ect ca n 
have of a dynamically changing object. 

That is not to say, however, that every documentary interpre- 
tation has the same claim to be accepted. For one thing, there is 
an immanent and formal criterion in that documentary interpre- 
tations must cover the total range of the cultural manifestations of 
an epoch, accommodating each particular phenomenon without 
exception or contradiction, and secondly, cultural products which 
we consider from the documentary point of view always un- 
mistakably impose or exclude certain interpretations, so that we 
do have a certain control. If, then, we have several different 
interpretations of an epoch all of which are correct in this sense, 
we can only ask which of them is most adequate, i.e. which one 
shows the greatest richness, the greatest substantial affinity with 
the object. Where the re is a _se eming con tradiction— between 
1 correct interpretations of a given epoch or Weltanschauungyh2iide.d 
I down by different generations of intei'preters, what wejhave to 
I do is to translate the less adequate (but still correct) interpretations 
•into the language of the more adequate ones. In this fashion, the 
image obtained in the earlier, still inadequate interpretation will 
.be 'suspended' in the Hegelian double acception of this term — 
[that is, the earlier organizing centre of the interpretation will be 
'.discarded, but whatever was incompletely grasped will be preserved 
in the new centre of organization. Neither objective nor expressive 
interpretation show this d^oiamic character. To be sure, an 
historical preparation is necessary for objective and expressive 
interpretation too: we cannot properly ascertain objective mean- 
ing without exploring the historical antecedents of the emergence 
of certain forms, and we cannot grasp expressive meaning without 
being familiar with the historical development of certain psycho- 



STRUCTURE OF CULTURAL PRODUCTS 63 

logical trends.^But once this preparation is done, the conclusions 
are simply true or false, without any 'dialectical' ambiguity 
(such as the one exemplified by the Hegelian term 'suspension'). 
One may describe the composition of a picture correctly or in- 
correctly, one may do justice to the purely visual elements of a 
picture or not, one may re-enact the authentic emotional content 
of a work or not — for all this one has to know only what is already 
'in' the ^^•ork — bu^tlieJspiritlDr global outlook of an epoch is some- 
thing the interpreting subject cannot grasp without falling back 
upon his own historic 'substance', which is why the history of 
documentary interpretations of past ages is at the same time a 
history of the interpreting subjects themselves. ^ 

V. THE PRE-THEORETICAL STRUCTURE OF CULTURAL PRODUCTS 

In the foregoing analysis, we distinguished three strata of 
meaning in every cultural product. It should not be forgotten, 
however, that the three strata we ha\'e been able to keep apart 
in our purely abstract account only acquire their separate 
identity, their neat stratification, within the framework of a theory 

1 In the previous discussion, the terms 'expressive' meaning and "intended',, 
meaning were used as if they were synonymous. Lack of differentiation between \ 
these two concepts cannot lead to confusion at this level of inquiry, inasmuch 
as 'expressive' meaning is always 'intended' meaning and can be understood ' 
only as such. Meaning which is not of the 'expressive' mode can, however, 
be 'intended', i.e. entertained by the subject as an intentional object. 

'Intendedness' belongs to an entirely different dimension from the three 
types of meaning distinguished above. The counterpart of 'intended' meaning 
(i.e. meaning as entertained by a subject in his particular way) is the 'adequate 
meaning' of a cultural objectification -which may inhere in the latter and can 
be ascertained as such by the outside observer even if the author of the cultural 
objectification does not entertain it consciously. The producer may (and quite 
frequently does) fail to grasp the adequate meaning of the product — and then 
there is a gap bet\\ een these t\vo kinds of meaning. 

This distinction between 'intended' and 'adequate' meaning corresponds 
to the distinction Max Weber makes between 'actual' and 'correct' meaning 
{Wirtschqft imd Gesellschaft, pt. Ill, sect, i, p. i ff.). 

This alternative, however, has little bearing upon our subject. We can, if 
we want to, apply this distinction to the terms of our classification of meanings 
and see which term permits us to differentiate between 'intended' and 'adequate' 
meaning. We shall then obtain: 

(i) both intended and adequate objective meaning; 

(2) intended expressive meaning; 

(3) adequate documentary meaning (possibly recognized in retrospect by 
the author of the work interpreted as document). 

Thus, it makes no difference to objective meaning whether it is intended or 
not; expressive meaning can be understood only as intended; and for docu- 
mentary meaning, it is unessential whether it is 'intended' by the author of 
the document or not. 



64 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

-i.e. an interpretive theory. It may very well be that it 
'is only reflection which introduces this analytic stratified structure 
in the object which in itself is homogeneous, non-stratified; and 
that in the immediately given, pre-theoretical object there is 
nothing that corresponds to the three strata. 
, This point calls for some consideration of cultural products 
/as they are given in immediacy, still untouched in so far as 
V possible by any theorizing. Does a monadic cultural product 
always present itself simultaneously in terms of objective, expres- 
sive, and documentary meaning? Is it even permissible to speak 
at this level of 'elements', 'fragments of meaning', that can be 
rounded out in various directions? And further: What manner of 
thing is this expressive meaning? Does it appear in the cultural 
product in the same way as the objective meaning, and for that 
matter: can it even be properly described as meaning at all? 
There is no escaping these and similar questions, and they call 
for a characterization of the cultural products in their a-theoretical 
form, as they present themselves when we grasp them adequately 
as value objects in the immediate, unreflected approach to the 
value in question. Questions of this kind are still concerned with 
form. The cultural product taken in immediacy also has a struc- 
ture, diflficult though it be to describe it systematically. Let us, 
then, try to develop, albeit in fragmentary fashion, some of the 
characteristic features of this immediately-given structure, 
/i^ In the first place: A cultural product in its immediate 
givenness does not present itself in a stratified form. In the picture, 
subject-matter, visual form, expressive meaning and documentary 
import are present all at once and together. The tones and 
intervals of a musical composition exhibit simultaneously an 
aesthetic form, a melodic and harmonic structure (objective 
meaning), an emotional content (expressive meaning), and the 
specific 'musical ethos' of the composer (documentary meaning). 
Now the question is whether structural stratification is irreconcil- 
able with this psychological simultaneity. May it not be that one 
and the same acoustic combination of sounds can bear various 
meanings at once, be encompassed by several forms from the yery 
begirming? There are some who might say that only the objective 
meaning (i.e. melody, harmony, rhythm, etc.) is actually present, 
while 'mood' and 'ethos' are introduced from without, associated 
and super-added, so that they cannot be considered as autonom- 
ous 'strata of meaning'. But on this reckoning, melody also should 
be taken as something super-added rather than actually given. 
For a tune is more than the individual tones and their temporal 
sequence. Melody is a meaning-imparting factor in the various 
sounds and intervals which is superimposed upon their purely 



STRUCTURE OF CULTURAL PRODUCTS 65 

acoustic content and stamps them as an aesthetic phenomenon. 
But the 'mood', the emotional content in its turn is also a meaning- 
imparting factor in exactly the same sense — by virtue of it, each 
individual note becomes something over and above what it 
^\ ould have been if the synthesis of melody alone had given it form. 

2. The prevalent inclination to regard expressive content as 
associated, introduced from without, is explained by the general 
reluctance to acknowledge it as 'meaning'. What remains after 
abstracting the purely musical element (acoustic organization) 
from a tune, from music, what is left of a picture after deduction 
of its objective meaning, its subject-matter and the form of the 
presentative medium, this residue is usually designated as 'mood', 
'atmosphere', 'general tone of experience', etc. One overlooks, 
however, the element of 'form' or 'meaning' in this emotional 
tone — a form which is certainly there although it cannot be de- 
fined conceptually. 

One of the reasons why the theorist of culture is so likely to 
miss these things is that we possess only a very few terms to 
designate contents of this sort. Our careless use of the word 
'feeling' for anything and everything of which we cannot form 
some kind of image is apt to make it seem as if art and cultural 
products in general could only convey vague feelings and emotions. 
In actual fact, however, we can distinguish more shades of 
expressive and documentary meanings than we know how to 
identify by means of theoretical concepts. We can distinguish 
without fail the 'vital atmosphere' expressed by a work of Mozart 
and Beethoven respectively, although we are not yet in a position 
to formulate this difference theoretically. Thus even where con- 
cepts are lacking as yet, there may still be ndn-theofetical 
disttnctions in meaning, and we may know how to make these 
distinctions in adequate aesthetic intuition. An example will show 
that the 'vital atmosphere' of a work of art is not merely an 
inarticulate subjective state but invariably a sharply patterned 
meaning, even though we have no concept to define it theo- 
retically. 

'Sentimentality' is a form of experience which is very frequently 
encountered as expressive meaning. Very often an objective 
meaning (e.g. a pictorial representation) is accompanied in the 
subjective or expressive dimension by a property we may designate 
as 'sentimentality'. 

Now this 'sentimentality' was present and discernible even 
before the concept as such was coined — and certain gestures, 
pictorial representations and motifs conveyed it unmistakably, so 
that it was clearly differentiated from certain related emotional 
characteristics such as sadness or melancholia. In an even earlier 

E.S.K.— 5 



66 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

period, however, this subjective pattern of experience itself had 
not yet come into being; not only the concept as such was lacking, 
but even the non-theoretical, intuitive form of experience was 
not there. In discussing works of this period, we cannot speak 
of sentimentality even in a pre-theoretical sense. In those days 
sentimentality could not be experienced as such; and if a person 
ever fell into a mental state of this sort, he or she could not 
identify it as a distinct species of emotion— and still less interpret 
other people's manifestations in terms of it.,^n experience as 
reference to the inner world can assume a specific character only 
if it is so sharply set off against the undifferentiated stream of 
experience that the subject can grasp it as meaning (though not 
necessarily theoretical meaning). Being.jet_Dffirom the mere flow 
of subjective states, being turned into something objective — this 
is what makes a meaning a meaning — whether of the objective 
or subjective, theoretically defined or non-theoretical variety. We 
must recognize this sphere of non-theoretical meaning as some- 
thing intermediate between theory and intuition, if we do not 
want to consider everything non-theoretical as intuitive and 
irrational; between merely endured psychic states which are in 
fact irrational, and the realm of theoretical meaning, we have this 
broad layer of non-theoretical but meaningful patterns of experi- 
ence. A good deal of expressive and documentary meaning belongs 
in this sphere, and it is open to understanding even while the 
corresponding concepts are still lacking. In the course of evolution, 
gradually more and more concepts are coined to designate 
contents of this sort, so that what was first distinguished in a 
non-theoretical sense later becomes also conceptually identifi- 
able. At any rate, it is wholly inadmissible to fix the genesis of 
a form of experience at the moment when a concept defining it is 
coined. 

3. The domain of meaning, however, has a wider extension 
than theoretical meaning together with the realm" bf^ non- 
theoretical meaning represented by cultural products recognized 
by official and academic tradition. There is a submerged culture 
which also is meaninglike in structure; it is set off against the mere 
flux, it can become an intentional object, it can be presented, 
it is 'unreal in the mode of meaning' — and for this very reason, 
it^cannot yet be identified with the irrational ground of being. 
•CHere is the habitat of patterns of experience (such as, to cite a 
few for which we have already found some sort of a title : resent- 
ment, melancholia, acedia, j^/z de sikle mood, what has been termed 
the 'numinous', 1 etc.); and these, if only because they have a 

1 Cf. Rudolf Otto, The Idea of the Holy (19 19), translated by John W. Harvey, 
Oxford University Press, 1928. 



STRUCTURE OF CULTURAL PRODUCTS 67 

cultural history of their ovvn, are not mere subjective events in 
Hfe but undoubtedly have meaning and stand out from the living 
stream as distinctly significant entities. (Pain as a vegetative state 
in which one lives has no his tory; sentimentality, on the other 
hand, most certainly has one.) /We find ourselves in the realm of 
the radically meaningless, of the wholly irrational, only when we^ 
leave all formed experience behind, when ^ve do nothing but 
function in the act which has no distinguishable meaning, when 
we reach the opaque region of the unorganizeHT'And of this 
alone is it true to say we do not 'understand' it in any sense of the 
word. We live in these acts, float along with them — possibly they 
colour our lives, may even be the most vital part of our existence; 
since, however, they do not present themselves as intentional 
objects, we do not 'have' them, either in introspection or in the 
observation of the other psyche. Tlris segment of our psychic 
life is the one we do not understand, either in ourselves or in others. 
But take anything that is in any way meaningful — to grasp it we 
can always rely on intellectual intuition which is just as adequate 
as our grasp of theoretical word-meanings. There is only one 
difference in this respect between our own and another's psyche, ^ 
namely, that we cannot perceive a meaning entertained by the 
other without a sensual medium. There is a continuum between 
these two poles of meaning — that of theoretical meaning which is 
totally de-subjectivized, and emotive meaning which is just 
barely objectified. And the nearer a meaning is to the latter, the\ 
more subjective will be the colouring it bears and the more \ 
intimate the nexus with the Here and Now of the individual / 
psychic stream. 

4. We have had to deal at some length with the meaning-character 
of our patterns' of subjective experience, because these constitute 
the stratum in which expressive and documentary meaning are 
grasped. They cast in a new form the optical and acoustic material 
which has already been formed by objective meaning. ^ 

Tempo and rhythm of speech, of drama and music constitutes 
this material — and rhythm and tempo, too, are organized units \ 
of (objective) meaning. What are, then, the elements of this objec- 
tive meaning from which the passage to expressive and docu- / 
mentary meaning can be effected? 

In this respect, it is not the content, the 'What' of objective 
meaning that is of preponderant importance, but the fact and 
mode of its existence — the 'That' and the 'How'. 

When I want to interpret what a friend of mine is saying in 
terms of expressive and documentary meaning, I pay attention 
less to the theoretical tenor of 'what' he says than to the fact 
'that' he communicates just this and not some other proposition — 



68 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

and also to 'how' he says what he says. Similarly, the subject- 
matter of a picture as a constituent of its objective meaning is 
relevant to its expressive and documentary meaning only in so 
far as the fact that just this subject-matter was chosen can be 
revealing. The 'how' in turn appears only in extremely subtle 
manifestations. In a conversation, next to the objective content, 
things like gesticulation, facial expression, tempo of speech may 
become significant; in a dialogue, it will be the way in which the 
exchange takes place, that is, in what relation a question stands 
to the answer- — ^whether the answer 'skips' the question or 
'transfixes' it, as it were. 

5. As we see, meanings of formed experience re-cast the objec- 
tive meaning in the mould of expressive and documentary mean- 
ing. And this gives rise to the further question: is an element 
grasped first as a unit of objective meaning (e.g. in a picture: 
as a purely visual Gestalt) , and then additionally also as a unit of 
expressive documentary meaning? It follows from what was said 
above that these latter modes of meaning are not simply super- 
added to the former one: the element under interpretation 
becomes an entirely new unit of meaning when seen under the 
aspect of formed experience. The first interpretation may be 
preserved (and, indeed, must in so far as it is objective interpreta- 
tion) ; but once we proceed to a new interpretation, we are faced 
with an entirely new meaning. The first one survives, not in 
modified, but in 'bracketed' state, and is replaced by an entirely 
new stratum of meaning. In the example cited above, the gesture 
made by my friend conveyed the objective meaning 'assistance'. 
Seen under the aspect of the expressive meaning 'pity', the same 
gesture in all its details becomes the vehicle of an entirely different 
meaning. And exactly the same thing happened when my friend's 
action was scrutinized in terms of its documentary meaning; 
the characterological category of 'hypocrisy' immediately in- 
formed each part anew, claiming the whole for its own. In-one 
point only has the objective mode of meaning a certain advantage 
over the others, that is, it can be grasped without the others 
whereas the others cannot stand alone but need objective meaning 
to become visible, although the objective meaning immediately 
becomes 'bracketed' while they are being contemplated. A picture 
or statue must exist first qua organization of a visual field, before 
expressive and documentary meaning can take hold of it; my 
friend's gesture must be interpreted as an instance of 'assistance' 
before it can be seen as a manifestation of pity or an example of 
hypocrisy (and it may be pointed out in passing that in this case 
the gesture qua organization of the visual field is left out of account, 
since this aspect of it is quite as irrelevant as the acoustic Gestalt 



STRUCTURE OF CULTURAL PRODUCTS 69 

of the uttered word is to its conceptual meaning). Objective 
meaning is always the first stratum of meaning to become relevant 
a nd c apable of interpretation — but it need not always consist in 
thejn-forming of a visual or acoustic substratum, as it does in art. 

6. What we have to do with here, then, are not 'elements' or 
self-subsisting 'units of meaning' which form novel wholes when 
other units are added to them. ItJsjiQione and the same 'element' 
which enters no^\• into objective, now into documentary and 
e:'i|)ressi\'e meaning. To assume this is to falsify the constitution 
of meaning by taking a crude spatial metaphor as expressing its 
essgBce. Here there are no parts a^^•aiting integration; on the 
contrary, something can only be a part by being grasped within 
its appropriate whole. What remains unaltered is merely the 
material substratum (a patch of colour, a line), and even that, 
in so far as it may be regarded as a definite 'something', is 
necessarily part of a compresent whole; and with the appearance 
of a novel \vhole, the part as such is also transformed^! 

The phases here described as forming a succession may of 
course psychologically be experienced simultaneously. I can 
envisage the patch of colour at once under the aspect of colour 
composition and of emotive value. Our_tendency to break down 
Gestalp_o£_mea.nmg in this atomistic fashion can be explained 
o nly by the unjustifiable paradigmatic preponderance of word 
language. Word language gi\'es an impression as if more compre- 
hensive units of meaning (sentences or systems of propositions) 
were built up, mosaic-like, from isolated phonetic units (words 
with their conceptual meanings), and as if the individual concepts 
had their own firmly circumscribed meanings outside the systems. 
Well, even in theoretical language, this is never wholly so ; but 
whereas theoretical concepts do have a certain vestigial autonomy, 
it would be a mistake to suppose that meaning has ever this kind 
of structure in the a-theoretical realm. 

Our theoretical account of the structure of meaningful objects 
up to now has made it appear as if there were self-subsisting 'elements' 
or 'units of meaning' which su bsequ ently entered into more 
comprehensive Gestalt-likt complexes ._At this level of our inquiry, 
however, we have to get rid of this ^\ ay of looking at things, 
and to showjiow each fragmentary 'unit' is already encased in a 
universe of interpretation [Auffassungsganzheit) whenever it is 
grasped as such — this 'universe' prescribing the pattern according 
to which all further units have to be fitted into the picture as it 
is being rounded out. This will be clearer if ^ve think of the 
'language of the body', of physiognomical interpretation, which 
is in far closer analogy to the structure of cultural meanings than 
the principal medium of theoretical meaning, word language. 



70 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUXG 

In physiognomies it is plain that the whole goes before, and that 

\ it is not built up mosaic-like from self-subsisting parts. If we thjuk 

lof a face with its characteristic features which cannot be described 

lin words but can nevertheless be grasped adequately in^jiieir 

juniqueness, such as, for example, the face of Leonardo's St. Anne, 

it is clear that the 'meaning' of the whole, this unique 

bharacter, cannot be said to reside in the mouth or the,ey£s, 

hui only in all these features together at once. The cachet is not 

/pieced together from physiognomic fragments with a meaning 

( of their o^vn, but it is the \vhole ^vhich imparts to each fragment 

Vits specific function and thereby its meaning and substance. 

VI. HOWCAN THE GLOBAL OUTLOOK BE TREATED SCIENTIFICALLY? 

We tried in the two preceding sections,, first, to show that 
the meaning of cultural products does possess a dimension which 
may be characterized as documentary meaning, and, second, to 
describe the way in which this documentary meaning is grasped, 
in pre-theoretical, direct experience. We now shall pass to a 
methodological discussion of certain works in which the attempt 
is made to give a scientific account of global outlook {Weltan- 
schauung) in terms of documentary analysis. Our discussion will 
be confined to a few examples which seem to be typical of a 
certain approach; no judgment of value, however, is implied in 
the selection of just these examples rather than of others. 

Once it is sho^^n that in every cultural product a docurnentary 
meaning reflecting a global outlook is given, we have ihsL basic 
guarantee that Weltanschauung and documentary meaning are 
capable of scientific investigation. Positivist method, correctly 
understood, required us to substantiate this point; for we, too, 
adhere to the pri ncipl e that science can treat only of what is 
given beforehand. iTliat documentary meaning in fact is given 
will be doubted only by tliose who confuse this correctly under- 
stood positivism ^vith a one-sided positivism oriented towards 
natural science exclusi\'ely, and who arbitrarily admit as positively 
given only the physical or at best — an utterly generous concession, 
they claim — the psychic daturn!] As_against this, we invoke the 
phenomenological principle th'at each spherF^oF f eatify Tias^its 
own kind of 'givenness', and that the domain of 'meaning'^lsHot 
restricted either to the sphere of physical 'things' or to the psychic 
events localized in one temporal sequence of indivTHiial 
experiences. 

We may, then, take the presence of documentary meaning in 
each cultural product, notably in the ^vork of art, as established; 
but with this, the most important condition for the possibility 



GLOBAL OUTLOOK TREATED SCIENTIFICALLY 71 

of scientific control of statements about Weltanschauung is fulfilled, 
since immediate intuitive perception of the datum — in our case, 
the direct presence of documentary meaning — is both the source 
of authentic richness and the basis of control of theoretical 
statements. Eliminate the dimension of documentary meaning, 
and each work losesTts specific morphological character. Hence, 
wEat.we have to do is only to work out the most fitting concepts, 
permitting the closest theoretical approximation to our object — 
in order to see where the difficulty of theory lies. In the direct 
aesthetic enjoyment of a work, we acquire 'knowledge' of it in a 
certain sense — such enjoyment also involves the presence of 
'something out there' (to avoid the term 'object' at this point), 
something we can identify and recognize. But if 'knowledge' is 
to be defined as theoretical knowledge, encompassed by concepts 
and logical connections, our methodological problem will consist 
in trying to find out how the datum grasped in pre-theoretical 
intuition can be transposed into theoretical concepts. 

On this point, too, those who accept the degree of precision 
attained in exact natural science as their standard will insist 
upon complete conceptualization of the object, i.e. the complete 
explication of the object in terms of theoretical concepts. They 
will not admit that we have 'knowledge' of anything unless this 
condition is satisfied. sCii£_categories which permit the fullest 
explication in terms of theory are form, relation and law. But 
we should be compelled to disclaim tlir possil:)ilii\' of knowledge 
in vast areas of exploration, if we took such a rigid standard 
literally, instead of calling to mind that each area, as it were,, 
lays^ovvn the requirements, the limits, and the nature of possible ■ 
theoretical analysis, so that criteria of exactness cannot be, 
transferred from one field into another. There are data which can 
be treated mathematically; others may be described in terms of 
different but still uniform regularities; still others are uniquely 
individual but nevertheless display an inner law of their unique 
structure, an inner consistency which can be described conceptu- 
ally; and finally, there are some in respect of which all theory 
must limit itself to an 'indication', 'approximation', or 'profiling' 
of certain correspondences, because their substantive charac- 
terization has already been accomplished in pre-theoretical 
experience. 

We saw in the preceding section that immediate aesthetic 
experience takes note of different strata of meaning but fails 
to keep them apart — at_this level, all strata are given in 'psycho- 
logical simultaneity '.vJLt is because immediate experience can 
englobe simultaneously different strata which only abstraction 
can leep apart that it has a richness and depth, a morphological 



72 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

concretcness and physiognomical cachet, beside which the 
abstractly pure sequences of one single stratum must appear as 
lifeless schemata. It would, however, be a fundamental mis- 
conception of the function of theory if we assigned to it (as the 
extreme position cited above would have it) the sole task of 
reproducing on the conceptual level the full wealth of what has 
already been grasped in immediate experience. "This could be 
done, if at all, by art rather than by theory; and although it 
is characteristic of historical and critical writing at its best that 
it contains passages which try to evoke the full concrete richness 
of the works in question, it is not this 'evocation' but sornething 
else which constitutes the essence of scientific 'rationalizatjojt^'. The 
evocative passages merely serve to make the structure of the various 
cultural products visible. The object of pure aesthetic intuition 
as such precedes theoretical analysis; it must be given before 
everything else, and while we are engaged in theoretical analysis, 
we must constantly refer back to it and renew acquaintance with 
it; but it is only a 'presupposition' for theory and its re-creation is 
never a substantive problem for science. Science seeks to account 
for the totality of culture as the 'work' of man, it does not seek to 
re-create it. We can expect neither complete rationalization jipr 
re-creation of the past from the cultural sciences. Their tasks, and 
possibilities point to a third way. 

We saw that direct experience itself contains many elements 
of theoretical meaning, and that pre-theoretical perception is 
charged with incipient reflection which, however, need not blur 
the directly given intuitive Gestalt in any way. Certain details 
may even stand out more vividly, when illuminated by theory; 
and theory may help us to see as enduring 'facts' certain things 
which would otherwise fade away after the intuitive flash is 
over. This, then, is one thing scientific analysis can do forjcultural 
products: it can stabilize them, make them endure, give tEem a 
firm profile. 

From this point on, we shall not be concerned with cultural 
reality as immediately given, but with the theory of culture as 
such. Our problem at this point is one of the methodology of 
science. 

Only methodological reflection will enable us to see clearly 
^he way in which documentary meaning is differentiated from 

/expressive and objective meaning, although, to be sure, immediate 
intuitive experience also gave us a certain fragmentary idea of 

\ documentary meaning. 

Thus far, cultural sciences, e.g. history of art, have focused 
attention mainly on objective meaning. We have seen above (pp. 
35 AT.) how the history of style constitutes a novel scientific object 



GLOBAL OUTLOOK TREATED SCIENTIFICALLY 73 

of its own by singling out certain aspects of works of art and 
studying them systematically, and how iconographical studies 
inventorize representational motifs and trace their history in 
philological fashion. In studies of this kind, the immediately given 
'monadic' unity of concrete parts of the individual works is 
dissolved in an abstractive process for the purpose of constructing 
new objects on a higher level of generality.^ 

A scientific, systematic analysis of documentary meaning 
would likewise proceed by detaching certain elements or units of 
meaning from their concrete setting and fusing them into validly 
ascertainable objects of higher generality by using appropriate 
categories and conceptualizations. Our question is how the 
documentary meaning always present in the concrete works can 
be disentangled from objective and expressive meaning and 
assigned to a particular subject or ego. 

Put in different words: the crucial question is how the totality 
we call the spirit, Weltanschauung, of an epoch, can be distilled 
from the various 'objectifications' of that epoch — and how we can 
give a theoretical account of it. 

A somewhat similar problem is that facing biography^: there, 
too, the task consists mainly in reconstructing the inner world 
of a subject from its outward manifestations and the fragments of 
meaning contained therein. Just as in the case of biography the 
entire material (works, actions, records, letters) is treated as 
'confessions', and the self-centred, immanent structure of each 
item — as determined by its objective meaning — is disrupted, so 
that the item in question may serve solely as an aid in reconstruc- 
ting the inner world of the subject, so in reconstructing the 
'global outlook', the spirit of an epoch, too, the entire material is 
made to serve a wholly new purpose, and the self-contained 

1 Thus H. Wolfflin ('Das Problem des Stils in der bildenden Kunst', Sitzungs- 
berichte der Kgl. Preuss. Akademie d. Wissensch., XXXI, 1912, pp. 572 ff.) speaks 
of a 'dual source' of style and develops on this basis his concept of the immanent, 
autonomous evolution of visual form, distinguishing this mode of analysis 
from one in which the concrete, integral works themselves are examined as 
such; this is a good example of the abstractive method we have in mind. 
(In a paper by Erwin Panofsky, 'Das Problem des Stils in der bildenden 
Kunst', in Z^itschriftfiir Aesthetik und allgem. Kunstwissenschaft, vol. X, pp. 460 flf., 
certain valid objections are advanced against use of the term 'visual form'.) 

2 There are two directions in which 'biography' may proceed. One kind of 
biography seeks to construct a personality profile of a poet from elements of 
his work examined in terms of documentary meaning; this is structurally the 
same task as the one faced in interpreting the Weltanschaimng of an epoch. The 
other kind is life-history in the strict sense, and it aims at reconstructing from 
elements of 'expressive' meaning the actual sequence of the inner experiences 
of the author. On this cf. pp. 55-56 above. 



74 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

'monadic' unity of the individual works is disregarded. Now just 
as any individual item in a biography, such as a single scene of 
a drama which is torn from its context and treated as a confession 
of the author, will gain an entirely new meaning in the light of 
its function in the biographic whole, any cultural object seen as 
the vehicle of documentary meaning will receive an entirely new 
meaning when it is seen within the context of the global outlook 
of an epoch. From this, a paradoxical result arises for all theo- 
rizing: we understand the whole from the part, and the part from 
the whole. We derive the 'spirit of the epoch' from its individual 
documentary manifestations — and we interpret the individual 
documentary manifestations on the basis of what we know about 
the spirit of the epoch i. All of which goes to substantiate the 
assertion made earlier, that in the cultural sciences the part and 
the whole are given simultaneously. 

The methodological problem might then be formulated finally 
as follows: how can we describe the unity we sense in all works 
that belong to the same period in scientific terms capable of 
.control and verification? 

One of the difficulties has already been mentioned (above, . 
pp. 40 f); it is that the totality of Weltanschauung (that which is 
'documented') is located beyond the level of cultural objectifica- 
tion and is not conveyed by any of the cultural spheres taken in 
isolation. Hence, we have to survey all the cultural spheres and 
compare their various objectifications in terms of the same set of 
documentary criteria. 

Our first task, then, is to evolve concepts applicable (like a co- 
ordinate system) to every sphere of cultural activity alike — 
concepts making it possible to ask meaningful questions regarding 
art as well as literature, philosophy as well as political ideology, 
and so on. 

A second stumbling-block for a comparative study of culture 
is the fact that culture is in process of historical evolution, so that 
the concepts we use in comparing various fields of cultural 
activity in a contemporaneous cross-section should also serve the 
purposes of a 'longitudinal' analysis of successive temporal stages. 
In other words: can we formulate a 'ubiquitous' problem and 
define concepts for its treatment in such a way that it will be 
possible to lay, as it were, cross-sections in two different directions 

1 In his paper, 'Das Problem des Gegebenen in der Kunstgeschichte', 
Festschrift fiir Riehl, Halle, 19 14, Johannes Eichner makes an analogous remark 
about style: 'At one time, we fix the date of a certain work on the basis of what 
we know about the stylistic peculiarities of the period; at anothre, we use the 
same work to add new data to our knowledge of the style of the period' 
(p. 203). As we see, the same paradox arises for objective meaning too. 



GLOBAL OUTLOOK TREATED SCIENTIEICALLY 75 

— once 'across' various spheres of cultural activity, and then across 
successive cultural stages? And if so, where are these concepts 
to come from — from philosophy, or from the various sciences 
dealing with art, religion, etc.? For the theoretical picture ob- 
tained will, in point of fact, vary, depending on the discipline 
from which we borrow the key concepts used in comparison. We 
shall now examine the methodological principles which have 
inspired certain attempts at constructing a historical synthesis 
along such lines. 

(JThe most plausible approach consists in seeing whether we 
can apply certain regularities and problems suggested by the 
history of philosophy to the examination of cultural fields other 
than philosophy. Thus Dilthey, whose pioneering achievement 
in calling attention to the irrational aspects of Weltanschauung we 
emphasized above, chose to take his departure from philosophy i; 
and although he shows great critical reserve and theoretical 
acumen in characterizing the various 'life patterns' {Lebens- 
systeme), the categories he uses bear the stamp of this primarily 
philosophical orientation. His three types of Weltanschauung (the 
systems of naturalism, of objective idealism [pantheism] and of 
subjective idealism) will hold good only if they prove fruitful in 
the analysis of the history of plastic art, among other things. This 
experiment was tried by one of his school, NQhlj3-.who skilfully 
reformulated these three types to such an extent as to be able to 
indicate three corresponding types in the visual universe and thus 
to raise the question: 'what types of visual forms correspond to the 
principal variants of philosophic thought' (p. 23). The author's 
method of inquiry is careful and accurate (he analyses pictorial 
subject-matter and pictorial form separately) — and it is the more 
disappointing that his concrete conclusions are so scanty and 
vague. The reason for this is, firstly, that concepts derived and 
sublimated from a theoretical field — philosophy — and the prob- 
lem which these concepts are fit to treat can contribute but 
little to the elucidation of a-theoretical fields (in their case, of the 
visual universe). Secondly, this analysis suflfers from the fact that 
it employs a timeless typology — styles are defined as correlates 
of various attempts at interpreting the universe, conceived as 
absolutely timeless alternatives. However, a theoretical frame- 
work which admits no dynamic (or possibly dialectical) variation 
is necessarily compelled to equate products of the most distant ' 
epochs — and thus to disregard precisely what is essential in them: 
the constit utive ro le of temporality. 

1 Op. cit., and Kidtur der Gegenwart, pt. I, sect. VI, pp. 1-72. 

2 Hermann Nohl, Stil und Weltanschauung, Jen-d, 1920. 



76 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

The more one is impressed by the inadequacy of explaining 
Weltanschauung in terms of philosophy, the more promising will 
be the attempt to start from art and analyse all other fields of 
culture in terms of concepts derived from a study of plastic arts. 
The 'hierarchical level' of plastic art is closer to the sphere of the 
irrational in which we are interested here; and it is justified by an 
interest in typology, if by no other reason, to examine for once 
a theory of Weltanschauung which takes its departure from art. 
\Ve should like to mention in the first place A. Riegl's study which, 
although not quite recent, is methodologically still challenging 
today. Riegl's primary objective is not to characterize the global 
outlook of an epoch as a whole; he merely wants to grasp the 'art 
motive' displayed by all four branches of visual art. These 
branches form a hierarchy according to the degree of distinctness 
with which they illustrate the 'guiding law' of the art raotivfi. 
At the head are architecure and decorative art which often 
exemplify these 'laws' in almost 'mathematical purity'; thus we 
have a 'horizontal' differentiation in the manifestations of the 
'art motive' of a period, to which is added a temporal differentia- 
tion of the art motives of successive periods. Antiquity as a whole 
has its one dominant principle, subdivided into an ancient- 
oriental, classical, late-antique art motive — each being sharply 
delimited. To illustrate the method, we have chosen Chapter V 
of the studyi which deals with the correlation between the art 
motive on the one hand, and contemporary science, philosophy, 
and religion on the other, and thus expands the art motive into a 
kind of 'world motive' or 'culture motive'. The successive stages 
derived from the observation of art forms correspond to stages of 
religious or philosophical world interpretation. In the sequence 
of art forms, we have [a) separate individual forms without 
s)Tithesis, {b) self-contained individual forms arranged in a purely 
serial rhythm, [c) aspiration toward full, three-dimensional 
spatiality, to be achieved by emancipation of the individual 
figures from the flat background. There are parallel stages in 
the other fields of world interpretation. Art gives clues to the 
necessary emergence of religious, then philosophical, and finally, 
towards the close of antiquity, magical thinking.- -All^jiages are 
developed in a strict logical sequence. Thus, all of the symptomatic 
features of late Roman art are traced back to one supreme 
principle: full three-dimensional spatiality. At least in the realm 
of the art motive, there is a strict logical connection between such 

' Alois Riegl, Die spdtromische Kunstindustrie nach den Funden in Osterreich- 
Ungarn im ^usammenhang mit der Gesamtentwicklung der bildenden Kiinste bei den 
Mittelmeervolkern, \"ienna, 1901, pp. 17 ff. 

- Op. cit., pp. 215 ff., and pp. 19 ff. 



I 



GLOBAL OUTLOOK TREATED SCIENTIFICALLY 77 

features as the separation of individual figures from the back- 
ground, the interval as an entity in its own right, the emergence 
ot the niche, the rhythmical treatment of colour and shadow, 
group composition without a collective character, objectivity, 
anonymity, stereotypization.^ 

Two aspects of this mighty effort at synthesis are of particular 
interest for us: (i) the bid for a strictly rational construction, 
and (2) the attempt to derive the meaningful variations of mature 
forms from similarly differentiated germinal forms. 

We begin with the first point. The surprisingly strict ration- 
alizing treatment of the material is explained by Riegl's desire 
to make the documentary meanings found by intuition amenable 
to objective verification. Verifiability may be ensured in two 
ways: (i) by the empirical confrontation of the hypotheses with 
the historical material; (2) by an attempt to establish logical 
links connecting the various symptomatic, documentary phenom- 
ena (e.g. the interval as an independent unit, or the appearance 
of the niche) with one another and with one guiding principle. 
Yet such a rationalization, it must be remembered, has nothing 
to do with a logical deduction of consequences from a theoretical 
principle — because it constantly presupposes the faculty of 
grasping pre-theoretical documentary meaning. As we said 
before: we can use an individual product of a past epoch as a 
corroborative instance of some hypothesis about Weltanschauung 
only on condition that we are able to perform a specific act of 
apprehending the a-theoretical strata of meaning exhibited by the 
product in question which put us in touch with its documentary 
import. We must already possess documentary meaning before 
we can bring it into correlation with other documentary meanings. 
Furthermore, Riegl's explanation of the separation of the figure 
from the flat background as an instance of the urge to achieve 
full three-dimensionality is more than a purely theoretical 
deduction. The existence of a necessary connection between these 
two things can only be 'seen', it is, in our terminology, compre- 
hensible only within the categories of the 'visual universe'. Thus, 
the strict quasi-logical development of Riegl's exposition should 
not mislead us. This type of rationalization actually presupposes 
so-called intuition (in this case, the original a-theoretical capacity 
of perceiving phenomenologically necessary correlations in the 
purely visual content); and every step in the 'deduction' (in so 
far as it is objectively founded) can be verified only by reference 
to phenomenologically necessary correlations between units of 
the visual universe. To take an example from a different a- 
theoretical field: we cannot explain in terms of extraneous 

1 Op. cit., pp. 209 fl\ 



78 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

categories why religious rejection of the 'world' may lead either 
to asceticism or to mysticism, i Only the form of 'alternation' is 
'logical'; but in order to understand why it is the one or the other 
of these roads that has to be chosen, we must re-enact genuine 
religious experience. Similarly, it is only by 'living' in the visual 
universe with its specific structure that we can recognize the 
necessary connection between 'aspiration towards three-dimen- 
sional spatiality' and 'isolation of the figure from the flat back- 
ground'. 

It is no doubt profitable to show — even without 'rationaliza- 
tion', i.e. without demonstrating the necessity of the connection — 
that the same documentary meaning is conveyed by objectifica- 
tions belonging to several different fields. But if we do only that, 
we fall short of achieving real scientific knowledge. 

Thus, starting from methodologically fruitful insights (which, 
however, became entangled with an unfortunate brand of 
'prophetic' metaphysics of history), Spengler^ attempted to 
broaden Riegl's original scheme ('Euclidean man', with his 
corporeal world without space, as the type of antiquity which 
strives for self-contained individual figures) and discern this 
elementary pattern in all fields of ancient culture, confronting 
it with the modern 'Faustian' aspiration towards infinity.^ 
Trying to characterize two antithetical primitive patterns of 
experience and cultural creation, Spengler uses the basic terms 
'Apollinic', 'Euclidean', 'corporeal', 'spaceless', 'bounded', 'non- 
historical and mythical', 'pantomimic figure' for the one, and 
'Faustian', 'infinitesimal', 'function', 'force', 'spatial', 'un- 
bounded', 'historical and genetic', 'dramatic character', for the 
other. But the characterization remains fragmentary. It may be 
admitted that the analysis of Weltanschauung — intent upon giving 
some idea of a common background behind all objectifications — 
must always resort to such transpositions of concepts — and, for 
example, use terms taken from plastic art to characterize the music 
of a period, and vice versa."^ We shall by all means take advantage 

' The example is borrowed from Max Weber's Aiifodtze zur Religionssoziologie 
(vol. I, p. 538 ff.; Tubingen, 1920) where an attempt is made to establish a 
rationalized typology of the various forms of religious non-worldliness. 

2 Oswald Spengler, The Decline of the West (1920), translated by Charles 
Francis Atkinson, G. Allen & Unwin, 1926-29 (London, printed in U.S.A.). 

■^ Cf. W. Sombart, Der moderne Kapitalismns, 2nd ed., vol. i, p. 476. 

^ Some extreme instances of this in Spengler: 'Newton's baroque physics', 
'the contrapuntal method of numbers', 'Catholic and Protestant colour', etc. 
It may be pointed out at this juncture that we are not concerned with the factual 
Tightness of the findings of Spengler or of the other authors whose works we 
discuss; we are solely interested in the methodological procedure involved. 



GLOBAL OUTLOOK TREATED SCIENTIFICALLY 79 

of the possible metaphorical and ambiguous^ uses of words in 
order to formulate this 'synaesthetic' experience. All this, however, 
ought to be only a means, not the end of the inquiry. Since there 
are no terms available for a phenomenological description of 
Riegl's 'germinal patterns' (to which we shall turn in a moment) 
we must resort again and again to a specific method which may be 
described as the 'sublimation' of a concept (as distinct from mere 
'transposition'). 'Sublimating' a concept means that a term which 
originally refers only to objective meaning is used to designate the 
documentary meaning associated with the objective one. For 
instance, the concept of 'baroque' is sublimated if, instead of 
designating a purely visual, stylistic category, it is used to refer to 
the general 'baroque principle', the 'spirit' of baroque, which can 
be grasped only by an intentional act directed to a documented 
essence. /But it is not enough to use the right terms; we must 
also wor^ out the necessary connection between 'objective' and 
'sublimated' meaning, the necessary progression from one stage 
to the next. 

Now this is precisely the heroic course on which Riegl (the 
discussion of whose work we now resume) has embarked; and 
this brings us to the second difficulty inherent in his method. 
He seeks to characterize Weltanschauung as a global entity by 
ascertaining certain common features in the various objectifica- 
tions. All such attempts, however, fail to go beyond abstract, 
formal analysis. They can only succeed in bringing to light the 
categories and forms of experience and expression pertaining to 
a given period before they become fully differentiated in objecti- 
fications — in other words: all they can establish is a typology of 
'initial', 'germinal' patterns of mental life. Such undertakings 
are neither futile nor hopeless. But it will never be possible to 
derive the wealth of meanings embodied in the actual works from 
these germinal patterns. This is the weakness common to Riegl's 
method and the other attempts we have reviewed so far. Complex 
meanings cannot be adequately grasped or interpreted in terms 
of elementary concepts. The common residue we are left with as 
the 'basic principle' of the Weltanschauung of an epoch is so bare 

1 It is too often ignored that the ambiguous use of terms — i.e. the same word 
used in disparate contexts — is by no means without relevance. If both a well 
and a tone are described as 'deep', this does not mean that a spatial category 
is applied to a non-spatial, musical datum, but the term 'deep' expresses in 
both cases the same general 'germinal' pattern of human experience which 
is only subsequently differentiated into separate spatial and acoustic patterns. 
Ambiguity expresses a relevant experience of pre-scientific language. It 
indicates some common underlying element. Ambiguity is an offence to the 
analytic mind, but a source of rich insights for tlie synthetically oriented 
scholar. 



8o ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

and abstract that it does not even suggest the wealth of forms we 
actually encounter when we look at the cultural products them- 
selves. 

The drawbacks of this method explain why certain theorists 
of Weltanschauung take a different position — I mean those who, 
inspired by Dilthey's fascinating example, take the historical 
approach and examine individual phenomena in all their con- 
crete detail in order to re-create the essence of a past epoch in all 
its multiform variety. The former group tended, in part at least, 
towards a philosophy of history; the adherents of the latter aspire 
to be historians first and last. I have in mind 'synthesizing' 
historians like Dvorak and Max Weber, who, though experts in 
some special field, have a strong sense of universal history which 
impels them to correlate their chosen subject with the 'total 
constellation'. The methodological problem facing this type of 
author is whether the unity of various cultural fields should be 
expressed in terms of 'correspondence', 'function', 'causality', or 
'reciprocity'.! While Dvorak decides in favour of 'correspond- 
ence' and parallelism, Weber postulates a mutual causal 
dependence among the various domains of culture and considers 
it necessary for purposes of a correct 'causal account' that the 
economico-material should at times be explained from the mental, 
and another time — as the occasion calls for — the spiritual from 
the material, with the reservation, however, that neither of these 
domains is wholly deducible from the other as if it were simply 
a function of it. He thinks that we can only establish certain 
partial determinants of the historic process in this fashion. The 
historians' way of proceeding clearly indicates that for them, too, 
the factor making for necessary connections (causality, reciprocity, 
and correspondence) is again the heart of the problem. The 
historian may have isolated with complete certainty one and the 
same 'documentary' symptom in several cultural domains; still, 
the question which form of connection should be interpolated will 
have to be solved separately. The category of causality — which 

i largely governs the explanations of natural science — seems to 
be best suited for this task. But — even apart from the question 
what 'causal explanation' means in the cultural sciences and what 
its scope is- — we may very well ask whether tracing a phenomenon 
back, not to another phenomenon, but to a 'global outlook' 
behind both, does not constitute a type of elucidation which is 
totally different from genetic, historical, causal explanation. If 
the term 'explanation' is to be reserved for the latter, we propose 

^ Cf. M. Dvorak, Idealismus und Naturalismus in der gotischen Skulptur und 
Malerei, Munich-Berlin, 19 18, pp. 10 fF.; Max Weber, Religionssoziologie, vol. i, 
pp. 12 ff., 205 ff. 



GLOBAL OUTLOOK TREATED SCIENTIFICALLY 8i 

to call the former 'interpretation' (Deutung) K^^^^The theory of 
Weltanschauung is an interpretive rather than explanatory one in 
the sense just defined. ;What it does is to take some meaningful 
objecF already understood in the frame of reference of objective 
meaning and place it within a different frame of reference — that 
of Weltanschauung. By being considered as 'document' of the latter, 
the object will be illuminated from a new side. 
'v^In other words: there is no causal relation between one docu- 
ment and another; we cannot explain one as the causal product 
of the other but merely trace both back to the same global unity 
of Weltanschauung of which they are parts. Similarly, when we 
trace two~actions of a person to the same personality trait, we 
cannot also treat one as being caused by the other, i.e. say that 
one kindness has caused another, instead of saying that two 
actions have been caused by the same kindness. Therefore, it 
seems that the form of connection chosen by Dvorak — parallelism 
■ — is the most adequate, best fitting one.i We cannot construct a 
theory of Weltanschauung — i.e. a pattern of necessity connecting 
documentary data — by explaining one as the causal product of 
the other, but solely by showing both to be parts of the same 
^totality: by disengaging, step by step, the common documentary 
imporL contained in both. That, incidentally, is not to say that 
listqrico-genetic causal explanation as such has no place in the 
:ultural sciences. Interpretation does not make causal explana- 
tion superfluous. It refers to something quite different, and 
consequently there is absolutely no rivalry between the two. 
Interpretation serves for the deeper understanding of meanings; 
causal explanation shows the conditions for the actualization or 
realization of a given meaning (on this distinction see p. 44 
above). At any rate there can be no causal, genetic explanation 
of meanings^not even in the form of an ultimate theory super- 
added to the interpretation. Mean ing in its proper essence can- 
onlyJbe_imderstood or interpreted. Understanding is the adequate 
grasping of an intended meaning or of the validity of a proposition 
(this, then, includes the objective as well as the expressive stratum 
of meaning); interpretation means bringing the abstractively 
distinguished strata of meaning in correlation to each other and 
especially to the documentary stratum. In the history of art, 
and in the cultural sciences in general, the procedures we have 
so sharply distinguished — causal explanation and interpretation 
— will, of course, both be applied in turn (but not in the same 

1 It should be stressed, however, that Max Weber's actual historical analyses 
do not always correspond to his theoretical precepts. In his theoretical writings, 
he insists upon causal explanation; in his historical works, he very often pro- 
ceeds according to the 'documentary' inethod. 

E.S.K. — 6 



82 ON THE INTERPRETATION OF WELTANSCHAUUNG 

breath!) in order to give as good an idea as possible of the full, 
concrete variety and 'vitality' of the historical process in question 
— although it is also quite rewarding to analyse an epoch con- 
sistently from a purely interpretive viewpoint. 



On comparing the various ways pursued by the methodology 
of historical research in Weltanschauung, we detect a gradual 
emancipation from^,^ methodology oriented entirely on the 
natural sciences'. Mechanistic causality no longer holds exclusive 
sway; the limits ahd^ scope of historico-genetic explanation be- 
come more and more closely defined. A new hearing is given to 
methods of elucidation formerly condemned. The mechanistic 
method by which the material is broken up into atomic constitu- 
ents no longer appears fruitful when it is applied to higher-level 
phenomena of meaning. In the realm of the mental, we cannot 
understand the whole from the parts; on the contrary, we can 
only understand the parts from the whole. Modern nominalism 
seems to be supplanted by a realism which recognizes universals 
(such as, for example,'spirit'), if only as methodologically war- 
ranted constructs. The concept of 'substance', which had practically 
been ousted by that of 'function', is again coming to the fore, 
and we no longer ask only about the How of things but also for 
a definition of What they are. Understanding and interpretation 
as adequate ways of ascertaining meaning have come to supple- 
ment historico-genetic explanation, and as an aid in determining 
the historico-mental in its temporal dimension, i the problem 
of historical dialectics once again comes into view. 

But — to conclude on my part with an attempt at 'documentary' 
interpretation — all these things are merely the methodological 
repercussions of a much more far-reaching cultural transforma- 
tion. The fact that natural science had to restore to history its 
rightful autonomy, that there is a dawning understanding of 
the distinctive nature of the mental and the historical, that we are 
striving after a synthesis and would like to draw the meaning and 
form of pre-theoretical data within the orbit of science — all this 
is a sign that science along with our whole intellectual life is in 
ferment; and although we see the trend of this process, we cannot 

1 Cf. Troeltsch's essays on methodology: 'Uber den Begriff einer historischen 
Dialektik', 19 19, in Historische Z^itschrift, series 3, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 373-426; 
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 393-451. 'Der historische Entwicklungsbegriff der modernen 
Geistes- und Lebensphilosophie',1920, in Hist, ^eitschr., ser. 3, vol. 26, no. 3, 
pp. 377-453. 'Die Dynamik der Geschichte nach der Geschichtsphilosophie 
des Positivismus'j Berlin, 1913, in Phil. Vortrdge der Kantgesellschaft, no. 23. 



GLOBAL OUTLOOK TREATED SCIENTIFICALLY 83 

anticipate its final outcome J^History never repeats itself literally 
—and if we tried to speed up the process by simply taking oyer 
parallel phenomena from the past, or accentuating existing 
tendencies by following them as models, we would be renouncing 
our own destiny. The logician can but decipher what has already 
been achieved— science and the spirit go their own ^vay^; 






CHAPTER III 

HISTORICISMi 

I. STATIC AND DYNAMIC THOUGHT 

HiSTORiGisM is an intellectual force with which we must 
come to grips willy-nilly. Just as in Athens Socrates was 
morally obliged to define his position vis-a-vis the Sophists, 
because the intellectual outlook of the latter corresponded to the 
socio-cultural conditions of the contemporary world and because 
their questions and doubts were a result of the broadening of the 
contemporary intellectual horizon, so we today are under a moral 
obligation to seek a solution to the problem of historicism. 

Historicism has developed into an intellectual force of extra- 
ordinary significance; it epitomizes our Weltanschauung (world 
view)f ^he historicist principle not only organizes, like an invisible 
hand, ttie work of the cultural sciences (Geisteswissenschaften), but 
also permeates everyday thinking^JToday it is impossible to take 
part in politics, even to understand a person — at least if we don't 
want to forgo present-day interpretive techniques — without 
treating all those realities which we have to deal with as having 
evolved and as developing dynamically. For in everyday life too 
we apply concepts with historicist overtones, for example, 'capi- 
talism', 'social movement', 'cultural process', etc. These forces are 
grasped and understood as potentialities, constantly in flux, 
moving from some point in time to another; already on the level 
of everyday reflection, we seek to determine the position of our 
present within such a temporal framework, to tell by the cosmic 
clock of history what the time is. Our view of life has already 
become thoroughly sociological and sociology is just one of those 
spheres which, increasingly dominated by the principle of 
historicism, reflect most faithfully our new orientation in life. 
Historicism is therefore neither a mere fad nor a fashion; it is 

J First published in Archiv fiir Soziabvissenschaft und Sozialpolitik,]. C. B. Mohr, 
Tubingen; vol. 52, No. i, June 1924. 

84 



STATIC AND DYNAMIC THOUGHT 85 

no^eveii an intellectual current, but the very basis on which we 
construct our observations of the socio-cultural reality. It is not 
sametliing artificially contrived, something like a programme, but 
an organically developed basic pattern, the Weltanschauung itself, 
which came into being after the religiously determined medieval 
picture of the world had disintegrated and when the subsequent 
Enlightenment, with its dominant idea of a supra-temporal 
Reason, had destroyed itself. 

Those present-day romantics who deplore the lack of a con- 
temporary Weltanschauung, who have the slogan 'organically 
developed' constantly on their lips and who miss this 'organically 
developed' in present-day life, these romantics fail to notice that 
it is just historicism, and historicism alone, which today provides 
us with a world view of the same universality as that of the 
religious world view of the past, and that historicism alone could 
have developed .'organically' out of the preceding historical 
intellectual roots. In contrast to historicism, it is precisely roman- 
ticism — in so far as it propagates an earlier pattern of the world 
view as a standard for the conditions of modern life — which 
appears artificial, contrived, and merely a 'programme'. 

All this does not mean that we should accept historicism as 
something given, as a fate which we cannot alter, as a higher 
and hostile power: historicism is indeed itself a Weltanschauung 
and h ence is going through a dynamic process of development 
and systematization. It requires the philosophical labours of, 
generations to help it mature and reach its final pattern. One 
would show little understanding if one were to accept any of its 
preliminary formulations as a final one. 

If, then, one docs not reject historicism out of hand but wishes 
to meet its challenge by going to its historic roots, then one must 
ask: 'What is the meaning of historicism, what do we understand 
by the term when we speak of it in this broader sense of a Weltan- 
schauung?' It certainly is obvious that it does not connote historio- 
graphy in general. Since Herodotus, history has been recorded in 
a multiplicity of diflferent ways: as a plain chronicle of fact, as 
legend, as an edifying object of meditation, as a spiritual picture 
book, as rhetoric, as a work of art. We have historicism only when 
history itself is written from the historistic Weltaiischauung. It is 
not historiography which brought us historicism, but the historic 
process through which we lived has turned us into historicists. 
Historicism, therefore, is a Weltanschauung, and at the present 
stage of the development of consciousness it is characteristic 
of Weltanschauung that it should not only dominate our inner 
reactions and our external responses, but also determine our 
forms of thought. Thus, at the present stage, science and scientific 



86 HISTORICISM 

methodology, logic, epistemology, and ontology are all moulded 
by the historicist approach. Historicism exists only since the 
problems involved in the new ways of facing life — problems which 
found perhaps their most tangible expression in historiography — 
reached the level of self-consciousness. 

The idea of evolution was undoubtedly the crystallization point, 
the philosophical axis of the new history as well as that of the new 
view of life. It is therefore the history of the idea of evolution 
that we may take as a starting point from which historicism may 
be most fruitfully and clearly understood. The idea of evolution 
is, however, only the most advanced component of this Weltan- 
schauung) once we think and live through its implications we cannot 
stop short of building around it a comprehensive mode of living 
and a congruent system of thought. 

The first approach to a historistic mode of thought and 
living lies, in any case, in the ability to experience every segment 
of the spiritual-intellectual world as in a state of flux and growth. 
We have become attuned to the doctrine of historicism only since 
there were written books about the evolution of institutions, 
customs, religions, psychic contents, etc. But so long as we confine 
ourselves to the mere registration of the 'mobility' of all these 
mental contents, so long as we are content with a simple feeling 
of eternal flux, we have still failed to grasp the full essence of 
historicism. It will be nothing but a new experience added to a 
variety of others, and if we carry on our philosophical reflection 
from this point, then we shall obtain nothing better than certain 
brands of relativism which are not too difficult to refute. The 
widely ramifying problems of dynamics arise only when one 
begins to realize that something more than a mere chameleon- 
like variation in the elements of life takes place in history. Histori- 
cism is more than the discovery that men were thinking, feeling, 
writing poetry, painting, and conducting business in different 
ways from one age to another. Historicist theory fulfils its own 
essence only by managing to derive an ordering principle from this 
seeming anarchy of change — only by managing to penetrate 
the innermost structure of this all-pervading change. 

One can, however, work out this order from two directions: 
firstly, via an historical vertical analysis and secondly, via an 
historical cross-section. In the first case, one takes any motif of 
the intellectual-cultural life — an artistic form, a political idea, a 
certain mode of behaviour, etc.— and traces it back into the past, 
trying to show how each later form develops continuously, 
organically from the earlier. If one gradually extends this method 
to all the spheres of cultural life, then one will obtain, so to speak, 
a bundle of isolated evolutionary lines. Within each individual 



STATIC AND DYNAMIC THOUGHT 87 

line of filiation, the merely factual, random nature of change 
disappears' and we are able to observe the law of change. The 
different lines of development themselves, however, are still 
thrown together rather at random, without any recognizable law. 
This type of historicism is not completed until the second set of cross- 
sectional observations have been made; these are made to show 
h ow, at one temporal stage, the motifs, which have just been 
observed in isolation, are also organically bound up with one 
another. The stream of ideas does not, then, flow and swell in 
separate channels (represented by the various spheres of life and 
culture). ThfL^separate motifs are, rather, mutually conditioning 
at_the_successive stages of evolution and are components and 
functions of an ultimate basic process which is the real 'subject' 
undergoing the change. 

jTo work out the structure or the configuration^ of this total 
process on the basis of a thorough examination of its separate 
elements is the final aim of historicism — a universal metaphysical 
and methodological principle which comes more and more to 
dominate the cultural sciences and now has become paramount 
in aesthetics, the science of religion, sociology, and the history of 
ideasZ^To extract out of the many-sided reality its slowly changing 
pattern and the structure of its inner balance, is the aim and at 
the same time the anticipated final vision of a fully developed 
historicisni. At the present time even special historical investi- 
gations are, as far as is possible, undertaken with such an antici- 
patory vision of the totality of history in mind, and there are 
frequent attempts to explain the present in terms of these historicist 
concepts. 

At this juncture, however, our historical researches and also 
Onr-^vays of experiencing the present become more than mere 
historiography — they turn into a philosophy of history. We no 
longer wish to know merely 'what happened'. We are interested 
not only in the immediate 'why' (the immediate causal ante- 
cedents) of an event, but we also constantly ask ourselves: 'What 
does it m ean?' As ^v'e integrate the element in question (the 
historical fact) into a totality, indeed a dynamic totality, and 
thence assess its meaning, our question becomes philosophical 
and the special science of history as well as the contemplation of 

1 The understanding of structure and of configuration is in no way the same 
thing. Alfred Weber has recently urged that there are two fundamentally 
different approaches to history ('Kultursoziologie', Der Neue Merkur, vol. 7, 
pt. 3, 1923, pp. 169 ff.). He differentiates between a 'logical' and a 'con- 
figurational' (Gestalt) experience. At the present stage in this introductory 
section, where we are still describing historicism, we need not go farther into 
the difference between the two methods. Later we shall have to differentiate 
more exactly. 



88 HISTORICISM 

li£e once again becomes philosophical. Whereas in the past it 
was a religious framework into which the various particular 
experiences were inserted so as to acquire a philosophical meaning, 
so now it is an historico-philosophical vision, which, increasingly 
refined and made more concrete in research, provides, with the 
help of the unifying principle of historicism, a philosophical 
interpretation for our world experience. It becomes increasingly 
clear that the hard-and-fast separation between history and the 
philosophy of history^ — according to which the former appears 
as a rigidly specialized discipline — merely corresponds to the 
degree of insight, or, it may be, the lack of insight, of a particular 
epoch. At the same time it becomes increasingly clear that even 
the seemingly most specialized investigation of historical detail 
has its basis in the philosophy of history — for otherwise, whence 
would its problem be derived? 

If, after what has been a period of maximum concentration 
upon isolated topics of specialized research, historical science 
increasingly seeks to put specialized investigations in a more and 
more comprehensive framework, and if, as a result, historical 
science is finally driven to work out its own outline, its foundations 
and presuppositions in the form of a philosophy of history, this 
only means that history becomes conscious of what up to now has 
been its unconscious driving principle. Historicism becomes a 
philosophy of history by extracting the implicit philosophy of 
historical description and consciously analysing the problems 
involved in the representation of the past. In this process, however, 
the life conditions which gave rise to historicism, and the historio- 
graphy which received its impulse from the same life conditions, 
reach the stage of consciousness, the stage of systematic self- 
realization. Philosophical problems which had already existentially 
determined the strains and tensions of the living Weltanschauung 
now present themselves at the level of reflective consciousness. 
/ New philosophies do not arise in the fashion that someone 
/vorks out a system or secretes a new set of ideas; they come 
~"into being when the already existing, but largely unreflective, 
philosophical content of the new vital attitudes enters the centre 
of the field of vision. It is possible to show that even the apparently 
most extremely specialized methodological and logical problems 

1 This interdependence of history' and the philosophy of history has in our 
time been most impressively demonstrated by Croce. Cf. ^ur Theorie und 
Geschichte der Historiographie , trans, by Enrico Pizzo, Tubingen, 1905; (trans. 
into Enghsh by Douglas Ainslie: On the Theory and the History of Historiography, 
S.A.S.). Cf. esp. Ch. IV 'Entstehung und begriffliche Auflosung der Geschichts- 
philosophie', pp. 52 fi., also p. 104 ('The Origin and the Conceptual Solution 
of the Philosophy of History'), 



STATIC AND DYNAMIC THOUGHT 89 

arise as the result of the focusing of conscious attention upon, and 
the full development of all implications of, those premises which 
had already been present, though not explicitly expressed, within 
some new vital pattern. JTis, however, a peculiarity of life and of 
living thought, that they-dtmot, as it would appear from the point 
of view of the completed system, proceed from a generalized 
premise or systematic starting-point toward the concrete and 
particular, deducing the latter from the former.s^The process is 
rather something like this: the unreflective life is concerned at 
first with immediate, concrete experiences and starts in medias res. 
Only subsequently, at the reflective stage, are those premises 
abstracted which lie hidden within these stimuli. But just that 
which one perceives in 'phenomenological' immediacy, is, in fact, 
already shaped by the historical process; it is already permeated 
by the form-giving categories of a new 'reason', a new 'psyche'. 
In every event, then, there is something other than the event 
'itself. The event is moulded by a totality, either in the sense of a 
law of patterning or in the sense of a principle of systematization. 
Hence there are premises embedded in the unique event which 
canbe unravelled. One may call this a 'miracle'; but it proves, 
in any case, tliat our unreflective creation of culture, our actions, 
our behaviour, and our perception, which carve new worlds in 
and around us, already possess definite categories and are 
mentally linked to reflective thought. These considerations show 
also that thought is only one of those organs we are using in 
groping our way ahead in the historical space surrounding us, 
taking possession of it, creating it, and, at the same time, account- 
ing for it. Cognition is no pure contemplation — -it approximates 
to this limit at most in certain specialized fields — it is no straight 
receptiveness, but is rather, like all sensory forms of organization, 
at one and the same time creative and receptive; it flows onwards, 
creating and receiving new forms in one continuous process. 

We now undertake to pursue the present stage of historicism 
into its last philosophical implications — to disengage those factual, 
epistemological, and logical presuppositions which are already 
contained in its non-rejlective application. Thus with the systematiza- 
tion of historicism itself, a destiny is fulfilled which historicism 
had to discover for all the past forms of the world process: that 
life has the constant tendency to ossify itself into a system. J 

At this stage of systematization of a new form of Weltanschauung, 
stresses occur which have to be brought into the focus of con- 
sciousness before we can proceed farther; such strains have 
existed ever since there has been a systematic, philosophical 
Weltanschauung at all. A conflict or tension arises between the 
ultimate conclusions and refinements which an earlier philosophy 



go HISTORICISM 

had obtained, by analysing an earlier stage of consciousness, on 
the one hand, and a different set of ultimate presuppositions 
which are derived from reflection upon the new socio-cultural 
reality, on the other. 
(If one wishes, therefore, to pursue the theory of historicism 
into' its last philosophical implications, one has the peculiar task 
of viewing historically philosophy itself and of giving the historical 
character of all philosophy the status of a proposition within 
one's own philosophical system. Ultimately it is a matter of 
interpeting in terms of a systematic insight the proposition that 
even philosophy undergoes an organic change of pattern. This 
implies, however, the existence of some idea of the relationship 
which the philosophies of the different epochs bear to one another. 
'^That is to say, we must have some idea whether the different 
philosophies mutually destroy each other or whether they develop 
together, so to speak, in a supra-temporal division of labour as 
ultimate parts of a still unfinished systemv_0.r, again, v/hether 
they are constantly constructed anew from still more comprehensive 
new centres in such a way that the old insights are incorporated in 
the new and invested with new significance. We believe^diat the 
last-mentioned conception is implied in the idea of historicisnsi. 

It would be, therefore, unhistorical simply to reject the con- 
clusions of an earlier philosophy. They, too, derive from reflection 
upon a certain stage of socio-cultural reality which is itself part 
of the total dynamic process. One can say only that the con- 
clusions of a past philosophy were obtained at a time when the 
new socio-cultural substratum had not yet emerged, so that no 
reflection could be directed upon it. But this is certainly no 
justification for an out-and-out rejection of the earlier conclusions 
and problems; -vvhat .we. have to do is rather to incorporate them 
in our own system.vThis means at the stage we have reached that 
the ostensibly universal significance of the earlier systems should 
be reduced to a partial, parochial one, and that its elements — in 
so far as they retain any validity at all — should be re-interpreted 
from a new systematic centre^^ ' 

^hat is utterly impossible, however, is to negate a new 
philosophy, based upon the reflective analysis of a new stage of 
socio-cultural reality, merely because this new system contradicts the 
ultimate presuppositions of an earlier system, corresponding to an earlier 
stage^' This is, however, just what is done by those who, imbued 
with the philosophy of the Enlightenment, reject ab ovo the 
gradually developing new insights of historicism. In this context, 
we mean by 'philosophy of the Enlightenment' those systems which 
in whatever form contain a doctrine of the supra-temporality of 
Reason. All the refutations coming from this quarter essentially 



STATIC AND DYNAMIC THOUGHT 91 

amount_to the charge of relativism, as allegedly implied by 
historicisni. This slogan is thought to be sufficient to destroy the 

new challenger In Germany it is mainly Kantianism that 

provides arguments for this type of refutation of historicism. The 
idea of the persisting identity, the eternal sameness, and the a priori 
character of the formal categories of Reason constitutes that 
kernel of Enlightenment thought which is challenged by the 
hi^toricist approach, in so far as it has already developed. 

^Vhat we have to show, as against Enlightenment, is that the 
most general definitions and categories of Reason vary and under- 
go a process of alteration of meaning — ajong with every other 
concept — in the course of intellectual history„ It is rather question- 
able in getieral whether 'form' can be sharply separated from 
'content', ^e may always ask to what extent the particular 
content, which, after all, is unqualifiedly historical, determines 
the particular formal structure, If, however, one tries to evade 
the problems involved in historicity by assuming a timeless 'form 
as such', 'concept as such', 'value as such', and similar 'as such' 
structures, then it becomes impossible to say anything concrete 
in methodology at all. But even this self-immobilizing position may 
be shown to be historico-philosophically determined. jABsolut e" 
formalism , is limited to, and can only arise in, a socio-cultural 
environment in which all values in their concreteness have 
become doubtful and the abstract form of value as such alone 
remains credible. This, however, means introducing an abstract, 
artificial distinction into the indissoluble unity of the cultural 
products — a distinction, by the way, which has nothing to do 
with supra-temporal validity. It corresponds completely to a 
historico-philosophical situation, which manifested this 'formal 
impulse' in all spheres and hence was able to comprehend the 
intended state of affairs only within a very partial perspective. 
^THat, in fact, the form-content dichotomy which is at the basis 
of a static philosophy of Reason is completely devoid of universal 
applicability, that it merely fits a type of thinking one-sidedly 
oriented toward the manipulation of rigid thing-like objects, may 
be seen from the fact that actually, if not avowedly, such thinking 
always operates with lifeless models.) When one speaks of formal 
categories or formal values, one thinks of containers or tubes in 
which liquids, say wine, can be constantly poured and where the 
vessels are thought of as permanent forms endowed with enduring 
identities. One obtains, however, a completely different correla- 
tion between form and content, when one starts out from models 
based on living and growing plants. Here, not only does the 
growing substance change, the sap rise and fall, but the form and 
the configuration [Gestalt] of the plant grows with and varies 



92 HISTORICISM 

witli the seli-renewing 'content'. The farther we get away from 
the world of rigid 'things', the closer we get to the actual historical 
substratum of psychic and intellectual reality, the more we shall 
doubt the validity of such ostensibly supra-temporal attempts at 
splitting up reality which concentrate all change on one side and 
all permanence on the other. The questions of the possibility and 
adequacy of historical abstraction, generalization, and formaliza- 
tion arise once again at this point. We mention these problems, 
however, only to cast doubt upon the alleged self-evidence of the 
anti-historicist positions. 

As a further argument against historicism, it has often been 
urged that logic and the theory of knowledge have a priority 
over the data of such special sciences as, say, psychology and 
historyT It is maintained that the various genetic facts (i.e. the 
historical findings concerning the constant variation in the content 
of Reason, as it manifests itself in the special sciences), can in no 
way affect the assertions of principle made by those systematic 
sciences which provide a foundation for any knowledge. 

What then, if it can be shown that the theory of knowledge 
of a particular epoch embraces nothing other than the ultimate 
assumptions of a thought pattern which happened to be the 
dominant one in that epoch? That the epistemologist and the 
logician in fact merely followed the lead provided by certain 
particular modes of experience (e.g. religious experience), or in 
scientific epochs, by the methodological peculiarities of certain 
special sciences which just came into the centre of interest? What 
if it can be shown — as is already clear today — that the ideal of 
an eternally identical Reason is nothing other than the leading 
principle of an epistemological system constructed post factum, a 
system that obtained its experiential foundations from the analysis 
of the conceptual structure of the exact natural sciences? It was in 
order to account for the exact natural sciences in the form in 
which they existed that one was obliged to construct a static 
Reason which would permit of eternal laws.^ One would have 
reached a far different theory of knowledge if one had taken as a 
starting point the dynamic historical sphere. Indeed, the chief 
problem of the Kantian theory of knowledge, which was in the 
form: 'How is (exact natural science) possible?' suffices to show 
that although epistemology is supposed to provide a foundation 
for the various sciences, it is in fact dependent, both as to its 

1 This does not mean to say that this 'timeless' conception of Reason 
emerges as a matter of historic fact only with the epoch of the natural sciences; 
in reality, it was there much earlier. In the text above, we are primarily 
concerned with the function of this postulate in the thought system of philo- 
sophies oriented toward the exact natural sciences. 



STATIC AND DYNAMIC THOUGHT 93 

own structural framework and as to its concrete historical 
content, on those spheres of knowledge which supply the 
material for its analyses.^ Consequently, the fact that one starts 
out with certain postulates, discovered in the analysis of one 
field of knowledge, does not enable one simply to do away with 
those postulates which are derived from the observation of other 
fields of knowledge. 

Finally, what if it can be shown that the accusation of relativism 
derives from a philosophy which professes an inadequate con- 
ception of 'absolute' and 'relative'; a philosophy which confronts 
'truth' and 'falsehood' in a way which makes sense in the sphere 
of so-called exact science, but not in history, since in the latter 
there are aspects of the same subject-matter which can be regarded, 
not as either true or false, but as essentially dependent on a given 
perspective or standpoint which can co-exist with others? 

In all these above-mentioned considerations, we have already 
confronted the ultimate position of a static philosophy of Reason with 
that of a dynamic historical philosophy of life. Here we are not con- 
cerned with details, but rather with showing to how great an 
extent the ultimate, logically decisive arguments of the two 
philosophies are supra-philosophical and pre-philosophical in 
origin. The fundamental problems: whether Reason is to be 
regarded as dynamic or static, whether the theory of knowledge 
possesses a structural priority over the philosophy of history, 
whether the final concept of truth, i.e. the distinction of the 
absolute and the relative, is conceivable only in one single form 
— and, in general, all the criteria which have a bearing upon 
this controversy — all depend on the attitude one takes toward 
reality and on the particular field of knowledge one prefers 
to invoke. The differences have extra-theoretical roots, and 
although one understands fully what the other means, one cannot 
achieve a theoretical mediation between these various pre- 
theoretical positions as long as one remains attached to them. 
This is what we have to show before everything else. 

In one sense, historicism already possesses an unconditional 
superiority over its opponents; it can conceive the contrast not 
only in the antitheses of the theoretical systems, but can illustrate 
this contrast in terms of contrasting modes of practical behaviour. 
Up to now, it has been only in the field of theory that our analytic 
discernment, sharpened by controversies, was in a position to 
discover, whenever a dispute arose, the ultimate theoretical 
assumptions which were responsible for the fact that divergent 

1 On the structural dependence of epistemology on the other sciences, cf. 
my study: 'Die Strukturanalyse der Erkenntnistheorie', Ergdnzungshefte iler 
Kantstiidien. No. 57. Berhn, 1922. (IncUided in a later volume of this series). 



94 HISTORICISM 

assertions could be propounded concerning one and the same 
state of affairs. But now the historicist is in a position, and will 
be so in an ever-increasing degree, to point out what extra- 
philosophical and pre-philosophical attitudes of life and what 
dominant socio-cultural realities determine the choice of this or 
that set of axioms. In so doing, the historicist steps beyond the 
immanent exclusiveness of theory and becomes more or less an 
'irrationalist' and 'philosopher of life'. But even this transgression 
of the boundaries of a particular sphere does not mean that he can 
be censured as a matter of course, as he is by those who have 
recourse to the autonomy of theory as something completely 
a priori. 

We can discover in the doctrine of the autonomy of the theoretical 
sphere a further fundamental opposition between historicist and 
non-historicist philosophy. The doctrine of the autonomy of the 
theoretical sphere is generally put forward by its adherents with 
complete, unquestioning finality; the reason for this, however, 
is not that the thesis is beyond doubt, but merely that it is taken 
for granted as a seemingly self-evident axiom of this type of philo- 
sophy. This axiom (the doctrine of the autonomy of theory) has, 
however, its roots and ultimate foundation in a pre-theoretical 
soil. When this doctrine of the autonomy of Reason appeared in 
modern times, it did reflect a sociological relationship between 
different spheres that actually prevailed in the contemporary 
'system of life and culture'. This relationship is, however, by no 
means timeless and eternal, but subject to historical variation, 
and this to such an extent that if one could describe how the 
relationship between the different spheres of life presented itself 
to immediate experience in different periods, one would get hold 
of the most fundamental index of cultural change. As evidence of 
the pre-theoretical foundations of the doctrine of the autonomy 
of theory, we may mention in passing the fact that for the Middle 
Ages, the subordinate, 'ancillary' relationship which philosophy 
and every other theory bore to theology, and to the religious 
sphere behind it, was something entirely beyond question. This 
was, however, in no way due to a narrow-mindedness, but was 
rather an ultimate formulation of that relationship between the 
different spheres of life which characterized the medieval world 
and dominated its mode of life. Just as, at that time, there did not 
exist any autonomous theory, so too, there was no autonomous 
ethics, no autonomous art, etc.; these were so embedded in the 
religious sphere that we cannot speak of them as autonomous 
in the same sense as we can with perfect justification when we deal 
with later periods. Only when the hierarchical determination of 
all the departments of life in the Middle Ages had lost its fulcrum 



STATIC AND DYNAMIC THOUGHT 95 

in the religious sphere, only then do we see a process in the 
course of which the various spheres of life become independent 
of each other instead of being merged in unity. And in due 
course we encounter theories concerning the autonomy of these 
vital spheres as a reflection of the existential process of their 
separation. Art emancipated itself in the Renaissance and then 
went through that development which ultimately culminated in 
the idea of Vart pour Vart. Ethical action, which was primarily 
based in religious experience and in a metaphysical system 
adequate to it, tended toward value autonomy {Selbstwertigkeit). 
Exactly the same took place with philosophy and with the 
'theoretical sphere' as a whole, which also emancipated itself 
from its ancillary position relative to the religious centre. It is in 
the Renaissance that the different spheres of life begin to emanci- 
pate themselves and achieve the autonomy of ethical action, 
artistic creation, and theoretical thought. The doctrine of the 
autonomy of the different spheres is only a reflective justification 
of that process which had already been completed and which 
only gained in depth and intensity as a result of philosophical 
reflection. Aesthetics, now constituted as a new science, ethics, 
with its doctrine of the autonomy of ethical valuation, and not 
least, the doctrine of the autonomy of the theoretical sphere over 
and against all other spheres — all these are now normative 
constructions and supra-temporal hypostatizations of this pre- 
reflective and historically determined relationship of the different 
spheres to one another. But it is just at this point that our own 
cultural outlook seems to be undergoing a transformation. We 
notice in all spheres (the 'ideological' is most conspicuous) that 
in contrast to these tendencies toward autonomy, atomization, and 
analysis (three fundamentally different tendencies, which never- 
theless have something in common) there is taking place a move- 
ment toward synthesis. What historicism undertakes in the in- 
dividual historico-cultural spheres, in art history, in the history 
of religion, in sociology, etc., in that it exhibits these different 
spheres of culture, not in their immanent exclusiveness, but as 
an integrative part of a totality — what historicism accomplishes 
here, is attempted also — to give one example out of many — in 
modern psychology. Here too, for example, the principle holds, 
that we should not only investigate the various sensory fields in 
isolation from one another, but should also explore the problems 
of the solidarity and unity of sensory experience. Here too, that 
analysing, atomizing, isolating tendency which dominated the 
other sciences as well, and which led to the endeavour to build 
up the most complex structures out of the most simple elements, 
is being supplanted by the recognition of 'complexes' and 



96 HISTORICISM 

'totalities' as primary and irreducible data, as given, for example, 
in perceptions of Gestalt. All these examples may be regarded as 
symptomatic of the fact that on the reflective ('ideological') side 
of the total process, one can find a number of parallel trends. 
This raises the question whether these phenomena do not represent 
a counterpart, at the level of scientific method, to the trans- 
formation process which is taking place in the social structure. 
If the atomizing, sectionalizing mode of thought may be regarded 
as corresponding to a social structure which allowed a maximum 
dissolution of the social bonds and which produced an economy 
consisting of liberalistically independent, atom-like units, then 
the present trend toward synthesis, toward the investigation of 
totalities may be regarded as the emergence, at the level of re- 
flection, of a force which is pushing social reality into more 
collectivistic channels. It may very well be, indeed, that this newly 
developing impulse to restore a psychic and intellectual unity in 
the place of the separation of spheres brought about by the 
previous epoch, the levelling down of the sharp boundaries be- 
tween them, corresponds to a general change in practical attitudes. 
Here too, therefore — so far as we can now see — the changed 
world situation is the basis for the emergence of a new theoretical 
superstructure. Here too, the doctrine of the autonomy of theory 
reveals itself to the eye of the sociologist of kno^vledge and the 
philosopher of history, in the same way as the earlier mentioned 
hypostatized non-temporal axioms of the philosophy of Reason, 
as bound to the historico-philosophical position and its correspond- 
ing 'life basis' {Lebensunterlage). By pointing out the basic con- 
nectedness of the theoretical premises of an epoch with the total 
structure of socio-cultural reality, we do not intend to deny 
flatly that these doctrines have any lasting validity at all. For in 
the final analysis of these problems, one will have to examine the 
question whether the results of a structural analysis and a demon- 
stration of the philosophico-historical and sociological determina- 
tion of theory can in itself establish, or, if it be so, refute the 
straight systematic validity [Geltungssiiui) of the theory itself. We 
were primarily interested in confronting the ultimate presupposi- 
tions of the two theories radically opposing one another today, a 
supra-temporal philosophy of Reason on the one hand, and a 
dyTiamically conceived historicist view on the other. Some of the 
points we sought to make Avere these: how the ultimate points 
of support of the possible arguments are organically bound up 
with the alternative oi static and dynamic^ how a static conception 
of the autonomy of Reason is bound up with the doctrine of the 
autonomy of theory; how, at the same time, the establishment of 
the primacy of epistemology leads to the same position from a 



STARTING-POINTS OF A THEORY OF HISTORICISM 97 

different direction; and how this same position is connected with 
a particularly rigid distinction — not tempered by historical 
considerations — between the 'absolute' and 'relative' as well as 
with a complete severance of all ties between the temporal and 
the supra-temporal. On the other hand, we wanted to show how 
all those positions, which in a static mode of thought consist of a 
system of mutually supporting propositions and as such are re- 
garded as self-evident, become problematic in their very pre- 
suppositions for a dynamic mode of thought. 

When one takes one's departure, not from a static Reason, but 
from a dynamically developing totality of the whole psychic and 
intellectual life as from the ultimately given, the place of epistem- 
ology as a fundamental science will be taken by the philosophy 
of history as a dynamic metaphysic; all problems as to how the 
various realms of thought and life are 'grounded' in one another 
become re-oriented around this fresh point of departure. What 
was formerly taken for granted thereby once again becomes 
problematic. 



ii. the starting-points of a theory of historicism 
(troeltsch) 

The preceding analyses were necessary in order to make clear 
the essential points we have to bear in mind in trying to assess 
the present status of historicism, so as not to obscure the problem 
by attending to aspects of inconsequential detail. It was abso- 
lutely necessary to make explicit the decisive issues which in the 
present-day, still fairly chaotic, state of the discussions on this 
matter, still lie buried and hidden or are not seen at all. Clarity 
about these matters is the more important as they have a close 
bearing upon the problem of providing an adequate foundation 
for the cultural sciences and for sociology in particular. 

If we now want to proceed from these preliminary discussions 
to an examination of actual work embodying the present state of 
historicism, we can do nothing better than turn to Ernst 
Troeltsch's recent book, which is expressly devoted to the prob- 
lems of historicism. 1 The intellectual personality of the author, 
with all its virtues and limitations, as well as the work itself in its 
objective treatment of the problem, are characteristic of the 
present stage of historicist attitudes and of the theory of 
historicism. 

Troeltsch represents a type of cultural scientist who, owing to a 

1 Ernst Troeltsch, Der Hisloiismus iind seine Probleme, vol. I. Tubingen, 
J. C. B. Mohr, 1924. 
E.S.K. — 7 



98 HISTORICISM 

deep desire to possess the fullness of life, would like to transcend 
the recent specialization of historical research and effect a syn- 
thesis. What he offers us is in no way a clearly defined field of 
inquiry, carefully delineated and marked off from other fields. 
What interests him is the overlapping of individual problems of 
detail, their branching out into more general problems and their 
intimate fusion with the totality of life. Thus his thought displays 
a constant, restless fluctuation, a crowding of questions upon 
questions, a dropping of problems once taken up, and a failure 
to keep apart historical and systematic problems. 

All these features constitute strength and weakness at the same 
time. The fact is that Troeltsch has no yearning for the happy 
isle of academic seclusion where, immured from life, unpolitical 
and inactive, he might live out a partial existence in manipulating 
minor problems in the apparent order of an unreal world. He 
prefers to be in the middle of things and to combine his theoretic 
interests with the suffering of a deeply disturbed world. This 
sometimes leads to a fondness for uttering the latest conclusions 
without taking time for reflection, and for searching after un- 
precedented novelties. He is the journalist of science (in the good 
sense of the word) in that he brings about an improvised union 
between topicality and scientific knowledge, probing with a 
delicate touch the deeper causes, but too hastily offering a final 
formulation of problems not yet ripe for this. He desires, it would 
appear, to unite in his person the two antagonistic types into which 
present-day German thought is divided as a result of sociological 
causes: that of the original and often profound non-academic 
scholar and connoisseur, who, however, often dissipates his 
energies as a result of his psychological and professional freedom, 
on the one hand, and that of the academic teacher who is master 
of his subject but is remote from the living centre of present-day 
life, on the other. Such a synthesis would seem to be highly 
desirable in itself. 

Complete inwardness {Inner Uchkeit) must be sacrificed if such 
an attempt is made; but this fateful outcome has a meaning 
which may be paraphrased in the following words: 'This man 
gave up what was best in him, because he did not aspire to be 
better than one can be today if one wants to maintain contact 
with present-day realities.' This style of intellectual production 
and this attitude toward the problems of life already manifest 
the new role temporality is playing in present-day thought. Man 
no longer feels himself, as formerly, placed in 'absolute situations' 
as if the highest virtue could be nothing but eternal and unambigu- 

1 Cf. his recently published Spektator-Briefe. Tubingen, J. C. B. Mohr, 1924. 



STARTING-POINTS OF A THEORY OF HISTORICISM 99 

ously definable. One might still indeed live a self-contained and 
unblemished life if one were to use as a foundation certain earlier 
positions whose residues still survive among us. But the pressures 
which spring from the contemporary situation, once they have 
penetrated our consciousness, permit now only a going to the 
limit. In this process, one must demolish all firm foundations 
under one's feet, and all one can do is to grasp the eternal as a 
component of the most immediate temporal problems. This means 
that the prophet and the leader themselves become guilty, but 
it may be hoped that the radicality of the commitment will 
compensate for the temporal limitation of the objectives. 

As a result of this lack of delimitation and specialization, 
Troeltsch's work is characterized by encyclopedic width, by 
universality of knowledge, by broad perspectives; the globe- 
trotting of modern man manifests itself more and more even in 
wandering through the past. Every problem is put in historical 
as well as systematic terms simultaneously; but the subject 
matter, the historical topic itself, is never exclusively in the focus 
of attention, since one is also interested in knowing the systematic 
and historical pre-suppositions on which the various actual 
developments depend. This eternal unrest, this urge to transcend 
one's own position and, so to speak, to glance over one's own 
shoulder — attitudes generated by the latest trends in epistemo- 
logical as well as historical thought — seem here to converge 
toward one integrated position. 

Thus historicism (which the book attempts to delineate) is 
viewed from two aspects: it is discussed as a systematic problem, and 
it is also presented in terms of the history of this problem. In this 
way the book can be regarded as a contribution to the history 
of the genesis of the cultural sciences. Historicism has an interest 
in tracing its own emergence and development: the course of its 
development is not described, however, in full epic compre- 
hensiveness, but only in relation to problems \\ hich have systematic 
significance. Two such problems are taken up as representative: 
[a) the history of the struggle for a standard of historical judgment, 
and {b) the history of the concept of evolution. 

In the treatment of the first problem, we see the unfolding of 
the epistemological problem involved in historical research; the 
second illustrates the history of an important logical category. 
In the first inquiry, it is clear how the problem of value and 
knowledge assumes a diflferent aspect just through its being raised 
in the context of historical knowledge, and how the conclusions 
reached will contrast with those of an epistemology essentially 
oriented toward the natural sciences. With the second inquiry 
it is seen how certain fundamental categories of one and the same 



TOO HISTORICISM 

discipline can assume a completely different aspect in different 
culture groups and temporal cultural sequences. A radical con- 
trast between the German and Western philosophies of history 
is demonstrated as exemplified by the different use of a funda- 
mental category, that of historical evolution. Whereas in Western 
science, the 'atomizing' and causally connecting approach 
gradually became paramount in the historical and sociological 
disciplines also, German philosophy of history is dominated by the 
categories of 'individual totality' and 'evolution', understood in 
a dialectical sense. As we see, in this instance, certain fundamental 
patterns of thought and knowledge (in fact, to a certain extent, 
logic itself) are integrally fused with different concrete historical 
units. By such analyses the historico-philosophical vision becomes 
uncommonly concrete. Thus, not a mere programmatic assertion, 
but the scientific investigation of the history of a general concept, 
that of evolution, shows us clearly in what way and to what 
extent even the cultural sciences, and even their logical categories, 
are differentiated, according to concrete cultural units and the 
corresponding perspectives. None of the philosophies which regard 
Reason as an absolute and as supra-temporal, none of those 
philosophies which direct their gaze fixedly on the enduring 
identity of this Reason and on the Utopian region of supra- 
historical truths and values can have an essential interest in the 
development of these truths, in their emergence and that of 
the categories upon which they are based, in the course of the 
historical process. For such philosophies, everything is placed in 
the rigid alternative of true or false, and anything affected by 
temporality and historicity is eo ipso false. Thus only historicism, 
which seeks out the truth in history itself, which tries to trace the 
connection between fact and value, can have a true interest in 
the problem of the history and the sociology of thought. 

For the unhistorical thinkers who regard truth as a supra- 
temporal absolute, all past systems are placed on the same plane 
and are accepted or rejected with reference to one system (namely, 
to that which in such cases is always hypostatized into absolute 
truth). With this type of approach, it is never seen that a direct 
confrontation of past systems with our own for the purpose of 
determining the truth value of the former is, strictly speaking, im- 
possible. If earlier philosophers, say, Plato, Augustine, or Nicholas 
of Cuse, appear to have maintained something akin to present- 
day theses, then, if one looks more closely, they will always be seen 
to have meant something different. For in their system, and, more 
fundamentally, in the vital context of their life, every sentence 
and every thought pattern necessarily had a different function 
and hence a different meaning. 



STARTING-POINTS OF A THEORY OF HISTORICISM loi 

It cannot be our present task to deal in detail with the historical 
part of the work. What interests us far more in this connection 
is what concrete positions are reached in its systematic part. 
We shall thus become acquainted, at least in outline, with a 
philosophy and a theory of knowledge which is based not on the 
exact sciences, but on history. In this account, too, we shall 
forgo detail and limit ourselves to a discussion of the author's 
ultimate philosophical principles. 

We will begin with Troeltsch's views concerning the subject 
having historical knowledge. Here is the first point of difference 
with Kant's philosophy, and that of Kant's present-day followers, 
who make a hard-and-fast separation between contemplation 
(theory) and practice, and between the knowing subject and total 
personality. According to Troeltsch, the subject possessing 
historical knowledge is not a purely contemplative one. In Kan- 
tianism, the knowing subject, the so-called epistemological 
subject, is completely freed from all concrete voluntary impulses 
and from the historically determined conditions of psychic life in 
general. As such, it is obviously a product of abstraction, a con- 
struct. In our opinion it is, as regards its structure, a subjective 
correlate created so as to correspond to the cognitive results 
{Denkergebnissen) conceived in a purely theoretical fashion, un- 
affected by spatio-temporal determinations. It is because the 
exact sciences can, in fact, make statements into whose content 
the historical and local setting of the knowing subject and his 
value orientation do not enter, that one may here legitimately 
construct a correspondingly abstract subject (free from historical 
determination). If one takes, however, as the basis for the con- 
struction of a cognitive subject, the structure of the judgments 
and sentences of the historian, then in all essential questions one 
must reach quite different conclusions. No statement about 
history is possible without the historico-philosophical precon- 
ceptions of the observing subject entering into its content. The 
historico-philosophical position of the observer makes itself 
evident not merely in the sense of a position of assent or dissent 
to that which is reported, but in the very categories of meaning, 
in the principle of selection and its direction. In order to make 
this quite clear, here is an example : from the content of a mathe- 
matical proposition it is not possible to discover when and where 
it was conceived. In contrast to this, every student of histori- 
ography can, with respect to any historical account laid before 
him, determine in what epoch, from what standpoint, and from 
what concrete cultural aspirations the purely matter-of-fact 
narrative is written. And once again, it is possible to do so, not 
merely in terms of the 'pro' or 'con' orientations of the writer, 



I02 HISTORICISM 

in terms of what he accepts or rejects, but in the sense of the 
constitutive categories of the meaning. A positivist, a follower of the 
historical school, a Hegelian, a Marxist will in each case base their 
accounts on different principles of selection and different patterns 
of synthesis, or categories, depending on their varying historico- 
philosophical positions. Thus the selection of facts and the way 
in which they are presented does not depend only on the value 
area in which the inquiry is conducted (i.e. whether the topic one 
treats belongs to art, science, rehgion, etc.), but the concrete, 
historically determined materialization of the various values also 
enters into the categorial structure of historical accounts. One 
cannot, however, achieve a concrete methodology of history, if 
one formalizes to the extent of completely abstracting from those 
aspects which make up the peculiar nature of this type of know- 
ledge. All these interpretive remarks which in many respects go 
beyond Troeltsch's arguments were necessary in order to clarify 
the full meaning of his central thesis: that historical knowledge 
is only possible from an ascertainable intellectual location 
[Standort), that it presupposes a subject harbouring definite 
aspirations regarding the future and actively striving to achieve 
them. Only out of the interest which the subject at present acting 
has in the pattern of the future, does the observation of the past 
become possible. The trend of historical selection, the form of 
objectification and representation only becomes understandable 
in terms of the orientation of present activity. That is the ultimate 
meaning and these are the implications of that which Troeltsch 
designates by the expression 'cultural synthesis within the present' 
{gegenwdrtige Kultursynthese) (cf. Der Historismus und seine Probleme, 
pp. 164-179). 

But it seems to us that this historical subject, who looks for a 
synthesis within the present (i.e. the productive integration of 
those trends of the present which to the active man appear at 
once commendable and creative) should not be identified with 
the accidental, subjectively, and empirically determined ego of the 
historian. The historical subject stands rather midway between 
the empirical ego of the historian and the purely supra-temporal 
subject of the Kantian theory of knowledge. The historico- 
philosophically relevant subject is just that kernel of the human 
personality whose being and dynamism is consubstantial with the 
dominant active forces of history. So much may be added to 
Troeltsch's own thesis as a supplement which, however, closely 
follows the general drift of his own argument. Starting from similar 
premises, Troeltsch makes both the selection of facts and the 
objectivity of historical knowledge dependent upon the concrete 
aspirations of contemporary man; he thus as a matter of course 



STARTING-POINTS OF A THEORY OF HISTORICISM 103 

rejects the Utopia of a supra-temporal system of standards and 
values. For him, the essential connection between 'standard of 
value' and 'cultural synthesis within the present' becomes the 
very cornerstone of the theory of history. Thus the problem of 
objectivity in this science is brought one notch lower, closer to the level of 
concrete research. It is no longer left up in the thin air of formal 
'relatedness to values' in general, where the essential differences 
between history and the natural sciences can in no way assert 
themselves in their full significance, but is turned into a matter 
of actual, substantive evaluation. The problem of objectivity 
thereby becomes more difficult and complicated, but, on the other 
hand, it will be possible to enrich it with a number of traits taken 
from the actual practice of historical inquiry. 

By thus putting the methodological and epistemological problems of 
history in closer touch with the concrete aspects of historical inquiry, many 
problems suddenly become visible which had to remain hidden 
as long as one was committed to a point of view of sheer formal 
abstractness. Firstly, we become concerned with the significance 
for knowledge of man's pragmatic, extra-theoretical aspirations. Thus 
is laid bare a point essential to all historical knowledge: that is, 
the point of convergence between the rational analysability of the 
past, and the forward -probing, primarily suggestive, irrational 
mental, and psychic potentialities of the total man and his 
activity. This convergence should not be pushed aside as a source 
of error; on the contrary, we ought to recognize it as a constituent 
element of historical knowledge, necessary for its characterization. 
Secondly, it becomes possible to show and assess the historico- 
philosophical (sociological) positional determination [Standortge- 
bundenheit) of every item of historical knowledge (a consequence 
of which is that the historical picture of the past changes with 
every epoch). It becomes clear that an inner link between aspiration 
and knowledge exists, and also what kind of link this is; they are, as 
it were, parts of the same totality. For in so far as modern man 
desires to know only in order to clarify his supra-rational aspira- 
tions, he already moulds the present even as long as he seemingly 
persists in pure contemplation; even his contemplation is a kind 
of activity. On the other hand, this concrete forward-striving is 
also the source of the knowledge of past ages which any epoch 
can achieve — and it likewise determines the limits of this 
knowledge. 

What these conclusions really give us is nothing more than the 
uncovering and very general characterization of that factual 
structure of the world which a philosophy inspired by the cognitive 
ideal of natural science clearly has to disregard and treat like a 
residue which has to be eliminated. The fact that history — in so far 



I04 HISTORICISM 

as it goes Ijeyond the criticism of sources — must always be written 
anew, not in the sense of a process of correction but in the sense 
of a new total orientation, the fact that history creates its prin- 
ciples, points of view, and standards out of the actual contemporary 
synthesis, this fact is here recognized as a theoretical principle of 
historical science. We wish to stress here, however, what we have 
already said by way of introduction, that the theory of knowledge 
— in so far as its inner structure is concerned — can never accom- 
plish more than just this. Kant, for example, could frame his 
critical question only in the form: we find the exact sciences in 
existence, how are they possible? — and everything else he accom- 
plished in this connection can be understood only as an attempt 
to uncover, starting from this central question, all those principles 
which are implicitly given once one postulates this type of know- 
ledge. His critique in this light is not so much a critique as a sub- 
sequent justification of the presumed validity of such knowledge. 
Troeltsch does not say so, but he actually assumes a similar 
epistemological position in relation to historical science as the 
type of knowledge which is postulated. He too says: historical 
knowledge, as it is given to us, has such and such a structure (as 
just described) ; but we must accept it as valid, i.e. as conveying 
real knowledge; this being so, how and on the basis of what 
assumptions is it possible? We have already seen that the implicit 
assumptions turn out to be different here from those underlying 
knowledge of the type of natural science. 

One might now think that from the principles of this theory 
of knowledge, akin to pragmatism, there must follow a doctrine 
of the relativity of all historical knowledge. It is just at this point, 
however, that historicism veers away from relativism. The mere fact 
that every item of historical knowledge is determined by a 
particular positional perspective, and that there is an intimate 
fusion of the particular historical picture of every epoch with its 
actual aspirations and concrete values, in no way implies the 
relativity of the knowledge so obtained. The concrete values which 
serve as a standard have developed in their fullness of meaning 
orgatiically out of the same historical process which they have to help 
interpret. There exists, therefore, a subtle bond between thought 
and reality — subject and object are here essentially identical. 
From this it no doubt follows that the historian can apply his 
value standards only to his own cultural area, to that part of the 
body of history out of which the present system of values has 
evolved — and in fact Troeltsch draws these conclusions (pp. 75, 
171). There still remains, however, the question of what is to be 
said about the different historical accounts of the same events 
which successive generations of historians put forward. Concerning 



STARTING-POINTS OF A THEORY OF HISTORICISM 105 

this, first of all, Troeltsch introduces an idea which we have not yet 
mentioned, namely, that besides the application of standards based 
upon the historical position of perspective of the observer,o/z^ may also 
describe and evaluate past epochs in terms of their own standards and values 
(of. pp. 117, 177). This characterization of historical knowledge 
is also correct. Historians indeed may grasp past epochs from those 
epochs' own centres, a mode of interpretation called the immanent 
critique and representation of the past. This is possible through 'under- 
standing' ( Verstehen) as an intuitive faculty of the historian which 
enables him to penetrate into his subject-matter, into the concrete 
valuations of the epochs in question, to a degree which is denied 
us when we are dealing with nature. In this context, therefore, 
no special difficulty is presented by this phase of historical know- 
ledge. There remains, however, the first-mentioned problem of 
the formation of standards which still permit the co-existence 
of conflicting accounts of the same historical subject-matter. 
Troeltsch does not treat this part of the problem with sufficient 
clarity, but he makes some passing remarks which suggest the 
direction of his solution. Thus, he says in one place: 'The historical 
subject-matter in its concrete detail and critical authenticity 
[Begriindetheit) always remains the same, and one can only hope 
to penetrate it more deeply and from different angles' (p. 43). 
This sentence would seem to point, if with insufficient clarity, to 
the possibility of mastering the problem outlined above. The 
historical subject-matter (the historical content, so to speak, of an 
epoch) remains identical 'in itself, but it belongs to the essential 
conditions of its cognizability that it can be grasped only from 
diflfering intellectual-historical standpoints — or, in other words, 
that we can view only various 'aspects' of it. By analogy with the 
discovery of Husserl^ — that it is a characteristic of the spatial 
object that we can view it only in different 'profiles' {Abschattungen), 
i.e. from definite local positions and in definite perspectives — one 
could, it seems to us, venture the thesis that it is part of the essence 
of a historico-cultural, but also of a psychic object, that it is 
penetrable only in 'mental and psychic profiles', that is, by 
way of certain cross-sections and dimensions of depth the nature 
of which is dependent on the mental-psychic perspectivic 
location of the observing, interpreting subject. 

The different historical pictures do not contradict each other 
in their interpretations, but encircle the same materially identical 
given historical content from different standpoints and at different 
depths of penetration. Thoroughly worked out, this theory ought 

1 Cf. Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phdnomenologie und phdnomenologischen 
Philosophic, para. 41, Halle, 19 13. Husserl extends his thesis to cover all par- 
ticulars of the spatial object; we limit ourselves in this illustration to the Gestalt. 



io6 HISTORICISM 

to lead to the demonstration of the existence of 'progress' (albeit 
not necessarily a unilinear one) in the sequence of the various 
historical theories of successive epochs. One misses in Troeltsch's 
work more extensive discussions in this sense. Such elaborations 
would require a complete dialectic ^ which, however, is lacking. 
Instead of this, we have an attempt at distinguishing periods in 
the history of historiography, ^vhich, though stimulating in itself, 
can in no ^vay determine hierarchically the meaning and value 
of the different standpoints. If one gives prior place to the 
philosophy of history, there is still need not only for the discovery 
of a genetic but also of an interpretive-genetic {sinngenetische) sequence 
of the patterns of culture; the static system of standards must in 
Fome way be transformed into a dynamic one. 

What possibilities of future development could one discern by 
observing the trends inherent in the unfolding of historicist 
thought up to our time? A survey of the field immediately dis- 
closes two fundamentally different routes by which one tries to 
reach the same goal. This contrast first emerged when Hegelian 
dialectics and the method of the German 'historical school' differ- 
entiated themselves; but the same duality persists in the treatment 
of many problems even today, as shown by the difTerent approach 
of the 'formal thinkers' {Formdenker) , as Troeltsch calls them, and 
the 'philosophers of life'. Reduced to a formula, the difference 
between the two orientations can be expressed by saying that the 
one calls the ultimate substratum of the historical process 'life', 
and the other, 'spirit'. Spirit and life refer to two fundamentally 
different types of experience, to t^vo fundamentally different 
attitudes toward the ultimate mystery which is half-hidden behind 
every historical event. Rationalism and irrationalism, construction 
and intuition, concept and image are played off against each 
other like slogans. One can trace how the current main doctrines 
of the 'philosophy of life' first emerge in the work of the German 
historical school and how, on the other hand, the Hegelian 
dialectical concept of spirit persists, and even becomes accentuated 
in the historical constructions of Marxism. 2 

1 We would like to quote a passage we consider as important: 'To under- 
stand an epoch means to measure it by its own nature and ideals, no matter 
how complicated these may be. If this is the first task concerning the foreign 
totality', the second is to compare and therefore also to measure this foreign 
spirit [Geist] with that of one's own life context. Then, however, we judge 
the foreign world not only by its own standards but by ours also and from 
these two different impulses there finally results a new and particular move- 
ment' (p. 172). 

2 Cf. the book of G. Lukacs to be cited later and also Karl Korsch, Marxismus 
iind Philosophie, Leipzig, 1923. H. Cunow, Die marxistische Geschichts- Geseli- 
schqfts- imd Staatstheorie, Berlin, 1920, may also be mentioned in this context. 



STARTING-POINTS OF A THEORY OF HISTORICISM 107 

The fundamental opposition between the 'Hegehans' and the 
'historical school', bet\veen the present-day rationalistically 
oriented historical philosophers on the one hand and the philo- 
sophers of life on the other, is most readily demonstrated in their 
treatment of the concept. Whereas for the Hegelian, the logician, 
the essence of the world process is itself a concept and hence the 
fundamental movement of spirit itself is traceable in the dialectical 
movement of the concept, for the irrationalist and intuitive 
thinker the fundamental movement of life can only be grasped in 
its manifestations by the intuitive assimilation of the concrete 
phenomenon; one could at most try to characterize it in 'descrip- 
tive concepts' or to retrace its Gestalt properties. It is immediately 
apparent that the latter position leads to the elaboration of new 
types of concept. Thus, to the already established types of 'func- 
tional' and 'class' concepts there will be added 'descriptive 
concepts' in Husserl's sense, 1 as well as the historico-philosophical 
concept of 'individual totality' in the Troeltschian sense (pp. 36 
ff.), which, according to him, is characterized by the fact that it is 
not wholly abstract or formal but always retains an irreducible 
intuitive nucleus. With the aid of such concepts it is possible to 
represent all manifestations of life within a socio-cultural unit as a 
documentation of the same historically individualized totality. 
In his historical account, Troeltsch already points to the capa- 
bilities as well as the limitations of the two methods. The Hegelian 
dialectic makes history too logical. It artificially transforms all 
irrational contents into logical contents and schematizes the whole 
evolutionary process within the particular trichotomy of thesis, 
antithesis, and synthesis; something which cannot be done without 
doing violence to the actual facts. The irrationalists, on the other 
hand — e.g. the followers of the historical school — much as they 
excel in retracing intuitively the subtle correlations between 
various manifestations of life within the same epoch, can do no 
more than outline individual portraits of the various periods (or 
'folk spirits'). They are not even conscious of any need to combine 
these isolated portraits in the dynamic unity of one evolutionary 
process. ^Ve saw, however, that it is a question of life and death 
for historicism to be able to link the various epochs together in a 
meaningful evolutionary pattern, in spite of their superficial 
diflferences. On the other hand, as a result of the irrationalist 
tendencies, which, next to the efforts of the historical school, 
include also philosophers like Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Bergson, 
Dilthey, Simmel, and the modern phenomenologists, it would 
seem to be once and for all impossible to impose on history a 

1 On 'descriptive concepts', cf. Husserl, loc. cit., sections 73-74- 



io8 HISTORICISM 

conceptual schematism, such as the Hegehan triad, to serve as a 
historico-philosophical framework. It also seems certain that the 
philosophy of history cannot come into its own after its long 
latency during the period of exclusive concern with documentary 
research without maintaining the closest contact with historical 
empiricism. The philosophy of history cannot mean a deduction 
from one principle, a constraining of facts; it can only mean a 
deliberate effort to ascertain the unity of the most deep-lying 
regularities in the historical process. In this sense the need for a 
dialectic as a hierarchically ordered dynamic system of standards 
still exists for those areas of historical research which are capable 
of rationalization. 

That Troeltsch seeks the union of the two methods is often 
to be inferred from the comments he makes on the various attempts 
to define a concept of evolution. It is not clear to us, however, 
how he hoped to achieve such a symthesis without even trying 
to construct a full-fledged dialectic, and by suddenly substituting 
in the published fragment of his work the idea of a 'pattern of 
history', and an even narrower 'periodic scheme' for the 'idea 
of evolution' . In any case the work remains a torso, a first volume 
which lacks continuation. One cannot therefore say anything 
certain, but it is hardly to be doubted that the second volume would 
have added nothing essentially new in this respect.^ 

Troeltsch, it seems to us, was the one who found the right 
approach to a theory of historicism. It is surprising to find the 
essential ideas of his voluminous work already clearly outlined in 
an essay published about twenty' years ago, Moderne Geschichts- 
philosophie^; it is even more striking how relatively little the 
manipulation of the huge mass of material has helped to make his 
ultimate conclusions more transparent. It seems to happen in this 
case for the third time, that the attempt to complete a personal 
philosophy of history becomes trapped in a historical survey of 
other authors' historico-philosophical and sociological con- 
ceptions.^ 



1 In this respect, we can see no essential solution of the difficulty mentioned 
above, even in the five lectures given by him under the title Der Historismus 
iind seine Uberwindung, Berlin, 1924. 

2 It appeared then in the Theologische Rundschau VI, 1904; now reprinted in 
vol. II of his Gesammelte Schriften (pp. 673 ff.). 

3 Cf. two equally voluminous works: R. Flint, History of the Philosophy of 
History, Edinburgh and London, 1893 ; P. Barth, Die Philosophie der Geschichte 
als Soziologie, vol. I: Grundlegung und Kritische Vbersicht, 3rd and 4th edition, 1922 
(ist edition, 1897); the second volume has never been written. 



FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 109 

III. FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 

111 this study wc have only set ourselves the task of formulating 
as concisely as possible the most essential problems of historicism, 
on the basis of its extant literature, and of demonstrating its 
intimate fusion with the present situation. In our opinion, the 
main question which calls for discussion in this context is that of 
the radical opposition between historicism on the one hand, and 
the philosophy of supra-temporality and the 'static' mode of life 
corresponding to it on the other. This discussion, it may be hoped, 
will at least enable us to indicate where those problems lie which 
offer an intrinsic difficulty to the doctrine itself, and which further 
work on the problem will have to start from if it is not to lose 
contact with the significant problems of our time. A fully elabor- 
ated philosophy of history can follow only as a result of a genera- 
tion of investigators devoting themselves to this task from a vital 
impulse; methodological analysis will, as in the past, only be 
incidental to this substantive work. In what follows we in no way 
wish to settle the whole range of problems in historicism; we 
intend, rather, just to add a few comments and point to further 
problems branching off at that point where we had to break off 
our account of Troeltsch's work. 

If one thinks once again of the hard-and-fast alternative between 
a logical-dialectical construction of the philosophy of history, say, in 
the Hegelian sense, and an intuitive-organic representation of the 
Gestalts of the various vital and cultural units, as ambitioned, for 
example, by the historical school — then one sees, on closer inspec- 
tion, that either method of analysis is in fact adequate only in 
dealing with this or that specific area of life or culture. It cannot be 
overlooked that a purely conceptual-systematic method is far 
better adapted for the representation of, say, the evolution of 
philosophy, than it is, for example, for the analysis of the history 
of art. With any two philosophical systems (or more specifically, 
any two historical types of philosophy) it will always be possible 
to summarize the systematic nucleus of the one so as to make it 
directly comparable with that of the other. And even more than 
this: it will also be possible to show what inner difficulties brought 
about the disintegration of an earlier system, and which of its 
elements got incorporated in a later system while also being 
supplanted by it, in the Hegelian sense of Auf he bung A Thus, with 
respect to those fields where the concept is really in its element, we 

1 An analysis of the ultimate positions of diflorent philosophical systems, in 
the restricted form of a sociologico-historico-philosophical juxtaposition, will 
contrast not the systems of individual thinkers, but such groups of philosophies 
{'tendencies') as possess significantly common points of departure (a common 
axiomatic, so to speak). The individual formulations of these points of contact 



no HISTORICISM 

may well proceed to a purely conceptual analysis, and we are also 
in a position to work out a historical dialectic (which, however, 
need not always follow a triadic rhythm, nor assume that what- 
ever is later is also of higher value). Cultural fields already 
rationally organized as regards their original constitution will 
permit to a great extent a rational analysis of their historical 
development. This applies in the first place to all those theoretical 
fields, from the special sciences to philosophy, which use concep- 
tual procedures (in the wider sense of the word) in dealing with 
their subject-matter, and systematize it in this way. But also open 
to a rational analysis are those fields which are not limited to the 
manipulation of the reflective and conceptual but still constitute 
vital systems permeated by a rational structure in spite of their 
non-rational, non-reflective origin. The economy, the legal system, 
the mores of an epoch do not arise in their entirety on the basis 
of a reflectively thought out plan of one individual. Nevertheless, 
they do have an actual meaningful, systematically understandable 
structure — in virtue of the rational, meaningful orientation of 
human conduct in general. The historical growth of such a 
structure is also capable of being conceptually analysed as a 
succession of vital patterns of a society. The historian and the 
philosopher of history are always in a position to represent, for 
example, the economic system of the middle ages, of early 
capitalism, and of developed capitalism, as a succession of sys- 
tematic patterns, evolving from each other. There is a certain 

in the systems of individual thinkers are only attempts to achieve systematically 
rounded versions of these 'ultimate assumptions' which in the last analysis 
derive from the whole process of life. In such sociologico-historico-philo- 
sophical analyses, chronological and historico-philosophical time are not 
automatically coincident. The beginnings of a later philosophy may already 
exist (as forerunners) in seed-form before their actual emergence. Again, 
philosophies whose orientations are based on earlier points of departure may 
live on in the company of a new philosophy. And further: individual systems 
can and will, and usually do, contain elements of the earlier systems more or 
less unconnected with the new. Here too, the structure of intellectual develop- 
ment is the same as elsewhere: new things at first appear within the framework 
of the old and detach themselves from it only step by step. But nevertheless it 
is possible here as elsewhere to set off ideal-typical totalities or tendencies 
from one another. Only in this sense could we attempt to contrast a static, 
supra-temporal philosophy of Reason with historicism. Such theories are 
controllable in the sense that it can be shown that the axiomatic systems 
distinguished by the theories in fact correspond to fundamentally different 
types of philosophizing. Such a juxtaposition is historico-philosophically and 
sociologically relevant only to the degree in which these philosophies, at first 
shown to differ only as to their immanent, theoretical content, succeed one 
another in conjunction with a similar sequence of a pair of non-philosophical 
orientations, and in correlation with a corresponding change in the overall 
social background. 



FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 1 1 1 

affinity between these two things— reflective theories on the one 
hand, and vital patterns permeated by rationahty on the other — 
by virtue of which one and the same rational construction can 
embrace both more or less without constraint. i It is clearly these 
fields that primarily attract the attention of those whose chief 
aim is the rational mastery of the historical process. 

On the other hand, we have those thinkers according to whom 
the task of a philosophy of history consists exclusively in working 
out in as close an approximation to concrete reality as possible 
the concatenation of the various vital manifestations of an epoch. 
These, of course, have been focusing their attention upon other 
fields of culture than the former school; they have sought their 
models in entirely different areas. Religion and art, ethos and 
erotic, that is to say, all those fields which are essentially psychic 
in nature, are accessible only to such a synopsis; an extreme 
logification does them violence. They are actually understandable 
less as systems than as 'parts' of a unified psychological Gestalt of 
the various epochs. But even here one can trace a pattern of the 
progressive transformation of these Gestalts, even though this 
transformation pattern differs from that of a succession of theo- 
retical systems. Owing to the 'imperialistic' tendency inherent in 
every method, however, the rationalists overdid the application 
of the rationalistic idea of progress, and the 'philosophers of life' 
that of the concrete-synoptical method; thus both actually falsified 
their account of the growth or progress of their chosen fields of 
culture. The rationalists did violence to the peculiar nature of 
the irrational fields; the irrationalists to that of the rational ones. 
To avoid these pitfalls, the best procedure seems to be to begin 
by combining the two historico-philosophical methods, that is, 
to describe growth in the psychic-cultural fields as a Gestalt 
transformation, and in the intellectual fields, as a rationally 
explicable succession and systematic unfolding of consecutive 
stages. But then, the question will arise whether we shall not 
be applying two separate methods, unconnected with each other. 
Is there a possibility of combining the Gestalt transformation view, 
which is germane to the psychic-emotional sphere, with the 
systematic-rational method, which properly belongs to the treat- 
ment of intellectual 'evolution'? 

We are of the opinion that this is possible, owing to the essential 
unity of the rational and irrational in human consciousness, a 
unity such that the rational is connected with its opposite pole, 

1 At this stage of the investigation we do not yet wish to go into the fact that 
within rationahzable development, two further types are to be differentiated: 
the rationally progressive and the rationally dialectical; we shall shortly be 
dealing with this distinction. 



112 HISTORICISM 

the irrational, through a number of intermediate stages. To begin 
with, we may mention the fact that there are areas which He, so 
to speak, in an intermediary zone between psychic-emotional 
'expression' and 'document' ^ and the intellectual, rationally 
organized system. This is the case, for example, with 'mores'. The 
mores of a society may easily be grasped in terms of Gestalt, as 
projection and concrete 'documentation' of a 'folk psyche' 
{Volksseele) . At the same time, however, they can also be repre- 
sented in systematic form, because they constitute a more or less 
consistent, self-contained, structured system. As to the legal 
system, it represents a further shift toward the rational pole, as 
compared to the mores; but it still contains abundant psychic- 
emotional components, so that it also can be grasped as a 'docu- 
mentation'. The historical school has indeed used the sphere of 
law with predilection as an expression of the 'folk spirit' (i.e. 
psyche) . 

Philosophy, however, is the foremost example of a field in which 
the rational and supra-rational are interpenetrating. The logic, 
the theory of knowledge, the metaphysics of any given period dis- 
play a mixture of the rational and irrational. Since of all these 
disciplines, logic shows the greatest preponderance of rationality, 
Ave may discern in its history a progress measurable in terms of an 
immanent standard. In epistemology, however, the two extremes 
meet. The theory of knowledge claims to be a strictly self-contained 
rational system; in the light of a structural analysis it can be shown, 
however, that the axioms from which any epistemological system 
takes its departure, are mainly derived from metaphysical- 
ontological presuppositions. 2 Although epistemology claims to 
furnish a standard in terms of which the truth of metaphysical 
systems can be judged, it turns out itself to have its basis in definite 
metaphysical positions. Thus, for example, one's whole epistemo- 
logical orientation depends upon whether one starts out from the 
ontological object as an ultimate, as did the ancients, or with a 
philosophy of consciousness, as one does today, and if the latter, 
whether one conceives Reason as the essential element of conscious- 
ness with the irrational as a limit, or, rather, posits the mystic 
irrational experience as the central element with the rational 
representing the periphery. Further critical differences of this kind 
separate those who take a dynamic and a static position respec- 
tively; those who consider the various cultural spheres as independ- 
ent and self-contained on the one hand, and those who see them 

1 On 'documentary meaning', see the essay on Theory of the Interpretation 
of Weltanschauung, pp. 55 in this volume. 

2 This is dealt with in my Strukturanalyse der Erkenntnistheorie, cited above, 
p. 93, footnote. 



FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 1 13 

merged in one unity on the other; those who sharply separate 
Being and \'alue, and those who try to derive one from the other 
— either deducing Being from \'alue logically, or the other way 
round, \ alue from Being genetically; those who see in theory 
and practice aspects of the same unity and those who keep them 
apart as strictly heterogeneous attitudes. .\11 these matters are 
settled before epistemolog\' as such begins; within epistemology, 
they are treated as self-evident. They derive, however, from 
definite metaphysical sources ^vhich reflect some new way of 
experiencing a constantly fluctuating existential basis. Everyone, 
however, has such a metaphysics, even the positivist -vvho denies 
all metaphysics as a matter of principle; today ^\•e can no longer 
have any doubt about this. 

The metaphysical presuppositions ^vhich in this manner enter 
into the purely logical structure of epistemology are themselves, 
however, as we have seen, neither purely rational nor self- 
contained. They represent, moreover, no purely cerebral exercises 
but are the conceptual expressions of the contrasting primary 
experiences of the diflferent subjects who live and philosophize 
at the same time. In this respect, however, the philosophy of the 
philosophizing individual is never stricdy his own product but 
always the reflection of a supra-individual psychic and intellectual 
position. What the individual holds, with a feeling of phenomeno- 
logical self-evidence, as eternal certainties, as a-problematic 
ultimates, represents, in actual fact, merely correlates of a specific 
configuration of vital and cultural factors, of a cultural Gestalt 
which is perennially in flux. Only the relative rigidity in the sound 
of words can hide the fact that behind the same words there is a 
constant change in the actual meanings. A closer inspection shows 
us again and again that the historical denotations of the various 
words are always diflferent. The only reason why philosophical 
systems are always disintegrating, and why the ultimate cor- 
relations \\hich the mind lays bare constantly break up, is that 
whenever successive generations of observers look at the basic 
substratum (whether one calls it 'life' or 'stream of experience') it 
ahvays breaks itself down into diflferent configurations; because 
'objective culture', as a projection of this basic substratum, always 
displays itself in different material and formal aspects; and 
because self-reflection always means something different and 
hence also finds different data in the 'self. It is, then, in philosophy 
that the two sides of the ultimate — Logos and Psyche — clash most 
radically; no wonder, since it represents knowledge and construc- 
tivity [Gestaltung) at the same time. 

For the philosophy of history, therefore, two separate methods 
will be available. Applying the one, one will portray the growth of 

E.S.K. — 8 



114 HISTORICISM 

the primarily psychic fields of culture. This method is essentially 
the same as that introduced by the 'historical school'; it consists 
in showing the basic unity of all the various fields of psychic 
expression, and in outlining a concrete picture of the unitary 
Weltanschauung behind these fields. The other method consists in 
following the history of those sectors of culture which develop 
in a rational-systematic, or at least rationalizable fashion, and in 
retracing just this rational structure. These two methods, however, 
will not remain completely unconnected. For, as we have already 
shown with respect to philosophy, there are certain points even 
in cultural fields showing a rational organization, where it is 
possible to show how the rational depends on psychic-emotional 
factors; such points in philosophy are precisely the ultimate 
axiomatic principles. Conversely, the predominantly psychic- 
emotional fields, such as art, religion, custom, etc., are ration- 
alizable in different degrees and at different levels and therefore 
always exhibit a ^ point of correspondence at which a parallelism, for 
example, between the economic rationality dominant in an epoch, 
and a specific mode of emotional expression, can be demon- 
strated. 

We can now see what is the significance of Alfred Weber's 
suggestion^ to distinguish between a process of 'culture' and a 
process of 'civilization', and to treat the former in terms of a 
concrete Gestalt, the latter, however, as a rational and limitless 
progression allowing for the carry-over of achievements made in 
one epoch into the following one. Weber has found a way to make 
use both of the idea of progress, as advocated by rationalism, and 
of the idea of organicism which is characteristic of the historical 
school, simply by applying each of these principles to the field in 
which it is appropriate. The 'psychic-emotional' phenomena, 
which make up what Weber calls 'culture', can be adequately 
grasped only by methods of concrete intuition and representation 
stressing the Gestalt, and by a specific type of concept evolved for 
this purpose. 'Civilization', in Weber's sense, on the other hand, 
can be described by the rationalizing method of the philosophy of 
the Enlightenment which conceived of it as a continuous progress. 

We believe, however, that there is a third field, which stands 
midway between 'culture' and 'civilization' in this sense, namely, 
philosophy and some related disciplines; and also that this inter- 
mediary field exhibits a strongly marked dialectical character in 

1 Cf. 'Prinzipielles zur Kultursoziologle'. Archiv fur Sozialwissemchaft, 1920. 
A. Weber differentiates, apart from the 'process of civilization' and the 'move- 
ment of culture', a further 'social process' which is irrelevant in this present 
context. A specifically sociologically oriented investigation would naturally 
concentrate on just this field. 



FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 115 

the structure of its development. For the purposes of this discussion, 
we shall define the difference between the 'rational' type of 
'progress' and dialectical 'evolution' as follows: a development 
sequence is dialectical when the successive structures replace one 
another in such a way that the following structure preserves the 
earlier in the form of a new system with a new centre of systematiza- 
tion. A sequence, on the other hand, has the character of limited 
progress when the entire development is encompassed within one 
and the same system which merely becomes more complete as time 
passes and, so to speak, adds new chapters to a system which may 
still gro^v but is always coherent in itself Whereas the evolution 
of philosophy, particularly ethics, metaphysics, and epistemology, 
is dialectical in character, that of technology and the exact natural 
sciences shows the progressive type. Quantification, the reduction 
of phenomena to a static system of measurement, assures us that 
the 'progress' of the findings of the natural sciences takes place 
within a 'static system'. It may be that the 'hypotheses' which 
attach themselves to these mathematically expressed findings are 
different in character. But not all sciences have this 'static' 
structure, always developing one and the same system. On the 
basis of what has been said, one will, it is hoped, accept the thesis 
that the philosophy of history and even historical science, in so 
far as it involves elements of historical philosophy, 1 display a type 
of development akin to the psychic and cultural, in which each 
stage essentially differs from the others. 

It is only by thus taking the differences of their inner structure 
into account that we can accept the frequently expressed view that 
philosophy as well as history are sciences in a different sense than 
mathematics and physics, without allowing a ^vrongly put 
alternative to mislead us into classifying the former as 'arts' (in a 
disparaging sense). Philosophy and history represent a type of 
knowledge which is essentially determined by a temporal position 
and is akin to the 'cultural' and psychic; but if one has once 
grasped the idea of a perspective dialectic-dynamic type of know- 
ledge, they do not lose their dignity as sciences by this fact. 

It is clear from the preceding remarks that the distinction made 
between the 'psychic-cultural', the 'civilizational' displaying a pro- 
gressive rational structure, and the 'dialectical' type of rational 

1 One dimension of historiography has a 'progressive' structure: docu- 
mentaiy research and critique are becoming ever more 'exact' in their methods, 
not only in the sense that the source material grows ever more voluminous, 
but also in the sense that the critique gains in sharpness. That historical 
\vriting is determined by the writer's "temiDoral position' becomes apparent 
only in the overall interpretations and the literaiy presentation which are 
determined by a definite philosophy of history e\en in the case of authors who 
profess a thoroughgoing positivism. 



ii6 HISTORICISM 

development, does not coincide with the essential delimitation of 
cultural 'spheres' or 'fields'. For example 'art', which at first sight 
appears as something belonging exclusively to the 'psychic- 
cultural' domain, includes components which exhibit the 'pro- 
gressive' features of 'civilization'. What in art one calls technique, 
that is primarily the 'knack' which may be discovered again and 
again, but also the differential skill possessed by some artists 
(masters of perspective, etc.) can also have a progressive structure 
of development. The properly 'psychic-emotional' dimension of 
art begins at the point where we can ask what use a certain epoch 
has made of these skills, what psychic states it has expressed by 
means of them, and what 'design preference' [Gestaltungswollen) it has 
manifested through them. Conversely, the 'progressive' dimen- 
sions of skill, etc., also depend on psychic-cultural factors; not 
only as regards their psychological genesis, but also in that a given 
society must have reached a certain 'maturity' in order to master 
certain civilizational achievements. Once in existence, the civiliza- 
tional components, powered by their own evolutional dynamic, 
may develop largely independently of the psychic sphere; but it 
depends largely on psychical factors when they first appear and 
when they pass beyond certain critical turning points. We should 
remember the principal problem with which Max Weber con- 
cerned himself — that is the question what cultural backgrounds 
have favoured the emergence and complete unfolding of such 
forces as capitalism, exact science, etc. 

Having taken up and developed Alfred Weber's distinction 
between 'civilization' and 'culture', we distinguished three types 
of developmental sequence: the psychic development which can be 
represented only as a concrete Gestalt; the dialectical, in which 
certain rationalized fields organize themselves anew round new 
systematizing centres; and progressive evolution, in which it is one 
and the same system which is gradually being built up. The prob- 
lem with which we began — that of standards of value — must be 
differentiated according to these three types of historical sequence. 
Thus, both the concepts employed and the standards applied are 
simplest when we write the history of a cultural field, such as 
technology or exact science, which 'progresses' in a straight line and 
merely develops one and the same system. In this case, we need 
not take into account either our own historic 'location' or the 
various historically determined peculiarities of the time we are 
dealing with. All we have to say is that our predecessors in these 
fields did not yet know most of the refinements in these fields we 
possess today — they had not yet discovered them. What they 
already possessed, however, in these ever-expanding 'civilizational' 
fields was basically a genuine part of the very same system we are 



FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 117 

still engaged in developing. The peculiar phenomenon of change 
of meaning does not occur in these fields. The Pythagorean 
theorem meant just the same for the Greeks as it does for us. A 
technical invention, as technical invention, 1 e.g. an axe, does not 
change its meaning in the process of time. In contrast to this, a 
psychically and 'culturally' determined phenomenon, such as, for 
example, a Greek cult, means something so entirely different to 
the Greeks and, say, to the Indians or us, that even the use of a 
generalizing concept (of 'cult') is extremely problematical if we 
really want to grasp the inner essence of the phenomenon. As, 
however, phenomena of this kind are nothing else but what man 
has thought them to be in their time, the all-important thing is 
not to consider them as rigid, unchanging entities, but to keep an 
eye open for their varying meanings. We do indeed see a progress 
in the sphere of civilization; the earlier and false conclusions are 
replaced by new and true ones, errors are eliminated and, despite 
all enrichments and emendations, one still works basically within 
the same system. The concepts and conclusions of the present can 
serve as the standards in terms of which the past is judged, since 
they are in fact independent of any temporal position. 

In those fields where progress is dialectical, however, the position 
is already different. One type of philosophical system does not 
destroy the preceding one, but neither does it complete it; 
rather, it reorganizes itself from newer and newer centres. These 
new centres are, however, supra-philosophically, or rather, supra- 
theoretically based; they are dependent on the new life situation 
which, in scientific epochs, includes the prevailing type of scientific 
system. It is these centres of organization, then, which in this sense 
express the truth of the epoch concerned. These systems are, when 
compared with each other, not all equal in value. Indeed they 
are not 'progressive' in the sense of a piecemeal construction of a 
single system by the addition of new conclusions — in this case the 
earlier conclusions would only be eliminated when their 'falsehood' 
was recognized. The progress they show is, rather, 'dialectical', in 
that they state a world view from an ever higher point of view, 
from a more comprehensive centre where the earlier insights are 
'integrated' with the new system. This is the reason why the 
essential problems never disappear. They return all the time, 
although their material correlates as well as their functional 
meaning are new every time. If one merely concentrates on 

1 Technology can, however, be 'enveloped' in magic. In such cases, of course, 
the magical interpretation which accompanies the technical invention as 
such belongs to the psychic-cultural inventory of the epoch in question, but 
later ages may lay bare the purely technical element of the invention — and 
improve upon it in 'progressive' fashion. 



ii8 HISTURICISM 

the constant recurrence of these problems, one may set up a 
generaHzing t)^ology of the various metaphysical and epistemo- 
logical theories, in the manner of Scheier who, following Dilthey, 
maintains that there are only a few types of metaphysics which 
always occur in periodical fashion, i But if one takes into account 
the fact that the 'recurrence' takes place on a higher 'level' every 
time, and that the new centre of systematization which represents 
a higher position than the preceding one imparts a new meaning 
to the recurring elements, then one Avill realize that a generalizing 
typology is not enough; we need, instead, a historico-philosophical 
hierarchy of unique temporal levels. ^ Every philosophy has, 
therefore, in this sense, a double criterion. One is that of inner 
truth: that is, whether a given philosophy can give a consistent 
account of the scientific and vital insights which emerge at that 
particular time. The second is that of dialectical truth: that is, 
whether that philosophy is more comprehensive, broader in scope 
than the preceding ones — systematically mastering the elements 
handed do\\n from the past, together \vith new elements, from a 
higher viewpoint, rather than merely preserving and reproducing 
them. But not every later system is necessarily 'higher' in this 
dialectical sense than every earlier one. Thus, the materialism of 
the middle of the nineteenth century was not higher or more 
comprehensive than Kant's philosophy, and this can be objectively 

1 Cf. Max Scheier, Schriften zw Soziologie iind IVeltamchauungslehre, I, Leipzig, 

2 At this point, the whole depth of the problems of dialectic is brought into 
view. So long as one attempts to master the different patternings of intellectual 
life by juxtaposing different types — a procedure which is quite feasible and 
does have its justification — then one has still not penetrated to the most 
essential core, to the unique individuality of the intellectual and the psycho- 
logical. This method of generalizing abstraction still takes the individual to be 
nothing but a particular combination, a set of general repeatedly encountered 
properties. If, however, one has experienced the fundamental feeling — a 
feeling first made articulate by romantic thought — that contained in every 
psychic-intellectual-historical phenomenon there is something absolutely 
unique, a creative principle whereby the historical individual is more than a 
peculiar combination of general properties, then one may risk the paradoxical 
undertaking of reducing this very uniqueness to a theoiy. This could hardly 
be achieved by using a generalizing typology (since such a theory considers on 
principle nothing but the general); hence the only remaining possibility con- 
sists in accounting for the temporal uniqueness of the phenomenon from its 
own position within a historical sequence. It is, however, \vith just such 
unique sequences that the philosophy of histoiy is concerned. (The possibility 
of the comprehension of such dynamic totalities from within, their compre- 
hension as parts of one historical movement toward a spontaneously evolved 
concrete value irradiating the body of history concerned, to\vard a meaningful 
goal — this possibility is an irreducible, but so much the more striking, capacity 
of the subject who reflects on liistory.) In this operation of fixing the unique 
meaning of a historical phenomenon in terms of its position within a temporal 



FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 119 

established by analysing and contrasting the systematic points of 
origin of these systems. It is also not necessary that the culmin- 
ating point of a historico-philosophical sequence be taken to be 
the philosopher's own time or his own system, as was the case, for 
instance, with Hegel. 

There is a 'utopia', a logical postulate, underlying this historical 
conception of philosophic truth, namely, that the overall philo- 
sophical process does possess its truth. But we should not imagine 
the truth as one that can be grasped from a position above the 
historical stream. Rather, we can grasp it as it is embodied in self- 
contained philosophical systems which grow out of the various 
centres which form within the stream. That philosophy has its life 
means that it constantly projects new elements into a new totality 
and creates new standpoints for the collection and systematization 
of both the previously grasped and the new elements. As we see, 
there is a Utopia corresponding to this dynamic cojiception of truth, 
just as the 'truth in se or the 'class of all valid propositions' was 
the Utopia of static Reason. The dynamic Utopia, however, has the 
advantage of following the lead given by the progress of actual 
philosophical work, rather than imposing upon it a Utopian ideal 
lacking contact with its specific historicity, its temporal Gestalt. 
Above all, these Utopias, these postulates of logic, are in no way 

sequence (the general overall drift of which is already known) the location of 
the phenomenon acquires the dignity of a source of meaning. If for a general- 
izing view sub specie aeternitatis the temporality of the individual which is to be 
characterized apjoears as an irrelevant factor — self-contained types being 
simply juxtaposed regardless of their genesis — a dynamic ordering of the 
historical phenomena seeks to master their specific differences of meaning by 
concentrating upon that element which is capable of founding meaning in 
uniqueness: a moment charged with meaning by virtue of its being a link in a 
philosophically interpreted historical sequence. 

Generalization, despite its inadequacy, is nevertheless possible because 
generally recurrent factors are also 'effective' in history. So there are types of 
metaphysics and theories of knowledge which are understandable by generaliza- 
tion, but these typologies cannot give the ultimate characteristics of the intel- 
lectual phenomena to which they refer. In my aforementioned study on the 
structural analysis of epistemology, I was still trying to give another merely 
'juxtaposing' typology — one which neglected tlie temporal, dynamic elements. 
This — like the typology of metaphysics represented by Dilthey and Scheler 
■ — is possible to a certain degree; the more concrete one wishes to be, however, 
the further one must pass over into the dynamic. I even attempted to show there 
how far a supra-temporal logical framework underlies all the differences of 
type in the possible theories of knowledge, which become structurally possible 
as such within this framework. Now it need not be denied that there is a tenuous 
stratum of the logical which is supra-temporal (in the sense of the civilizational 
as defined here). The deeper one goes into historical problems, however, the 
narrower becomes the extent of this supra-temporally distillable residue, and 
the intellectual process of formalization becomes increasingly burdened with 
difficulties. (Cf. p. 93, above.) 



ISO HISTORICISM 

arbitrarily contrived speculations; nor are they sudden visions 
imparted, as it were, by revelation; what they express is, rather, a 
concrete structural insight, thought through to the last conse- 
quences, for which the impetus is given by the concrete pattern of 
the historical movement itself. 

It is, then, possible in principle to work out on the basis of this 
dialectical-dynamic Utopia a historico-philosophical hierarchy of 
the philosophical standpoints succeeding one another; and one 
can do this in a rationally exact fashion. Since the object of 
dialectical analysis, philosophical thought, unfolds itself in the 
form of concepts and systems, this type of analysis is in no way 
extraneous and irrelevant to it. The change from one type of 
system to another may be explained by the shift from one centre 
of systematization to another, and it can always be showTi which 
of these types of system is more comprehensive. Such a presenta- 
tion must, indeed, concede that every systematization (even the 
highest available) is determined by a particular 'location' and in 
this sense represents 'perspectivic' knowledge. Yet this in no way 
involves a relativism; it amounts, rather, to a widening of our 
concept of truth which alone can save us from being barred from 
the exploration of these fields in which both the nature of the 
object to be known and that of the knowing subject makes only 
perspectivic kno^vledge possible. It would be quite nonsensical to 
adopt a relativistic and agnosticist attitude toward the perception 
of the spatial form of an object, merely because one can always 
see it exclusively perspectivically and in 'foreshortenings', 
depending on one's position. Accordingly, the positionally deter- 
mined, perspectivic nature of philosophical but also of historical 
knowledge should not be blinked; quite on the contrary, it must 
be recognized as essential to the structure of these types of know- 
ledge. The expressions 'positionally determined' (standortsgebunden) , 
'perspectivic', are obviously meant in an analogical sense only 
when they are applied to historico-philosophical rather than 
spatial objects. And the analogy is justified, in so far as there is an 
essential similarity between the two kinds of object, in that neither 
the historical object nor the spatial object can be fully grasped 
in one picture. But there are also essential differences. The 
'positions' of which we speak in connection with historico- 
philosophical knowledge are, of course, not 'spatial' positions; nor 
does the object of such cognition persevere in rigid immobility 
vis-d-vis the subject. That a view of history is 'positionally deter- 
inined' means that it is formed by a subject occupying a distinct 
position in the 'historical stream', all parts of which — those occu- 
pied by us as well as those occupied by the object we examine — 
are constantly in transition and motion. 



I 



FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 121 

Now as regards the form of development and the interpretation! 
of fields which have neither the 'progressive' nor the 'dialectic- 
systematical' type of rationality but are essentially irrational (like 
art, religion, etc.), it is clear that a historico-philosophical interpre- 
tation in terms of Gestalt alone can do them full justice. It could 
only lead to hopeless distortion if we were to try to establish the 
inner unity and coherence of these 'irrational' manifestations of 
an epoch in terms of a rationalized system. But it is possible to 
show that they constitute one Gestalt as parts of an individual 
whole — as 'documentations' of the same 'psychic-cultural' con- 
figuration. 2 This does not mean that the treatment of these 
phenomena is beyond scientific controllability. Here also, the 
object of scientific inquiry is constituted on the basis of objective 
categories. Only this time it is not, for example, the category of 
causality but that of the whole and the part in a particular special- 
ization. We do not intend by this to maintain that causal investi- 
gation is to be eliminated from history; our subject-matter in the 
present paper is only the philosophy of history and that part of 
historiography which is itself philosophical ; we wish only to 
point to the fact that where 'irrational' fields of culture are to be 
treated, we cannot do without Gestalt type concepts. As soon as 
one speaks, for example, of 'tendencies', an enormous wealth of 
phenomena is gathered together in a concrete characterization of 
the whole process as a Gestalt — and what historian could do 
without such concepts as 'tendency', 'style', etc.? The question is 
how to make sure that such a global characterization of an overall 
process can have objective validity. What standard should we 
apply in selecting from the infinite amount of detail just those 
salient features which constitute a 'tendency'? What Troeltsch 
said about the connection between the formation of standards 
and the contemporary cultural synthesis applies here. In fact, we 

1 The form of movement within a cultural field or discipline (e.g. philosophy) 
and the form of movement of its historical interpretation (the succession and 
the relation of the different historical pictures of the past 'development' of 
philosophy) are two different matters which ought to be kept apart. In 
exactly the same way: the problem of standard in evaluating historical pheno- 
mena (the hierarchical arrangement of the different philosophies according 
to their dialectical content of truth) and the problem of the standard which 
guides us in the evaluation of the different historiographic works on the same 
range of phenomena (in this case, on philosophical facts) are different sets of 
questions. In a final treatment of these problems, they would primarily have 
to be kept apart. In the above account, they were treated together for the sake 
of brevity. No source of error arises in our case where, corresponding to their 
actual unity, historiography and the philosophy of history are regarded as a 
unity. 

2 On the problems of 'documentary' interpretation, cf my essay on 'Theory 
of the Interpretation of Weltanschauung' in this volume, pp. 55 ft". 



122 - HISTORICISM 

can formulate 'tendencies' either on the basis of material, concrete 
values consciously held by the society under investigation — or on 
the basis of our own motivating values. 

Thus it appears that the 'psychic-cultural' element is that 
component of history which cannot be interpreted 'progressively'; 
each epoch must re-interpret it anew from its own psychic centre. 
Thus, the standards used are rooted in, and inseparable from, the 
interpreter's own 'psychic-cultural' situation; this, however, has 
nothing to do with relativism. That is to say, the successive 
interpretations of the past from the various temporal centres have 
not all the same claim to being recognized as valid, although there 
is here no rational-formal criterion (e.g. such as that the tempor- 
ally later is the more correct), or dialectic-rational criterion 
(according to which the different centres of systematization would 
be comparable), on the basis of which we could decide between 
two interpretations. But we still have a material criterion which 
should not be underrated. That is, if we compare the various 
subsequent attempts, undertaken in different epochs, to interpret 
one and the same historical period, we have to admit, first of all, 
that the variety of opinion is by no means anarchic. The interpre- 
tations, to be sure, differ among themselves; but since they all 
have to satisfy the concrete historical evidence, as established by 
historical critique, and since, moreover, they must present a 
consistent and coherent picture, there are limits to the differences 
of interpretation, and a comparison becomes possible. If we make 
such a comparison, we shall find firstly, that the divergencies are 
not excessively great, and secondly, that each shift of interpretation 
can be explained as uniformly determined by the peculiar 'loca- 
tion' of the interpreter. Furthermore, the psychic 'positions' from 
which the various interpretations stem do not all have the same 
cognitive value. If we look at the evidence closely enough, we 
shall always be able to ascertain which psychic position allows 
a deeper penetration into the object which is to be interpreted. 
Judging the various positions on the basis of the depth of penetra- 
tion which they permit, we can arrange all positions that have 
materialized thus far in a definite hierarchy. This 'depth of 
penetration', however, is a methodological category which repre- 
sents that new element which the methodology and epistemology 
of the cultural sciences must add to the categories of a methodology 
and epistemology solely based upon the needs and practices of 
exact natural science. 

Cultural-historical interpretations, as a matter of fact, not only 
have to be 'correct' in the sense that they satisfy the available 
evidence and are internally consistent; they also must be 
'adequate', i.e. they must penetrate their object to its total depth. 



FORMS OF HISTORICAL MOVEMENT 123 

But we can rank the various periods in terms of the 'depth' of the 
interpretations they have furnished only by invoking 'quaUtative', 
'material' evidence. That this solution of the problem really 
overcomes relativism will be doubted only by those whose 
orientation is an exclusively rational-formalistic one, who eschew 
the problem of material evidence as much as possible, and believe 
that all appeal to non-formal, material evidence oversteps the 
boundaries of science. Correspondingly, we have to mention 
another essential difference between Kantianism and historicism 
— a difference in respect of Avhich phenomenology sides with 
historicism^ — namely, that Kantianism on the whole recognizes 
only formal criteria of objectivity, whereas historicism also appeals 
to "material evidence', thus adopting a position from which alone 
it is possible to construct a material philosophy of history. 

As we see, both the patterns of historical change and the 
standards of value that historians have to apply vary according 
to the field which is the subject of historico-philosophical analysis. 
All three types of theories of evolution we have reviewed — that 
of the Enlightenment, ^v'hich is oriented toward the natural 
sciences, that of dialectical evolution which goes back to Hegel 
and Avhich we have presented in modified form, and, finally, the 
concrete, 'documentary' characterization of the various 'folk 
psyches' which was initiated by the historical school — all these 
t)^es of theory have their truth, but the truth of each applies to 
certain sections of the total process only. These evolutionary 
theories represent different approaches which historical thought 
worked out successively or concurrently — approaches which 
supplement each other, each being correct wdthin its o\vn field. 
And further: even a certain universalization of each of these 
methods has its relative justification. As we have seen, the civiliza- 
tional, the psychic-cultural and the dialectic-rational cannot be 
neatly separated from one another, for every concrete work or 
manifestation of culture contains, as it w^re, a civilizational, 
psychic, and dialectical stratum. Hence, each of these methods 
may to some extent be extended to all fields. We saw how even 
works of art (which certainly would be regarded as primarily 
belonging to the psychic-emotional field) include a 'civiliza- 
tional' dimension, just as historiography, which as a science would 

1 The difference between historicism and the representatives of phenomen- 
ology consists in the following: the phenomenologists conceive of 'material 
evidence', e.g. in the realm of values, as of something static; they seek every- 
where to discover timeless essences and, as Troeltsch said [Historisimis, p. 208), 
'tack empirical, individual facts on to them only subsequently'. x\s against 
this, historicism holds that history not only individualizes general essential 
laws "but keeps us on the alert for absolutely new, unforeseeable value- 
creations' {Ibid.). 



124 MISTORICISM 

have to be reckoned as part of the civihzational field, also has a 
dialectical, historico-philosophical dimension. It follows from all 
this that evolution schemata based exclusively upon a dialectic- 
rational conception need not altogether come to grief if one tries 
to encompass the entire historical process in them, since they are 
able to account for all those aspects of the psychic-cultural process 
which lend themselves to dialectical rationalization. Conversely, 
the concrete-intuitive method will be able to account for those 
aspects of the 'rational' fields which are psychically determined, 
their rationality notwithstanding. However, there is always some 
exaggeration if any one of these methods is presented as the only 
one — if, for instance, the proponent of 'dialectical' rationality 
overlooks the fact that cultural manifestations do have a residue 
which is impervious to his methods; or if the irrationalist fails to 
recognize that no amount of psychological interpretation will 
enable us to understand the peculiar law of the evolution of 
scientific theories, let alone their content. And furthermore: 
precisely because it is our contention that an enduring and com- 
prehensive dialectical movement is discoverable, we must stress 
that a certain type of phenomenon need not belong to one and the 
same field all the time. The 'state', for example, in certain epochs 
had a largely 'psychic-cultural' character; but this does not mean 
that, at other times, it cannot pass more and more over into the 
'civilizational' sphere. It is just because of the possibility of 
variations of this kind that \ye can characterize the actual structure 
of a period; the wealth of combinations merely provides a richer 
inventory for a dynamic, historico-philosophical interpretation of 
the world process. 

IV. HISTORICISM AND SOCIOLOGY 

All this has been said, however, merely to indicate the direction 
in which the solution of the problems raised by historicism may 
be sought. In so far as one can probe into the sociological deter- 
mination of methodological forms, it is extremely probable that at 
the present time the activistic-progressive tendencies are behind a 
gradual elaboration of the rational dialectic method, expressed in 
an absolutist language. ^ Since it is this thought form which renders 
the world process most completely calculable, it is well suited 
as an immediate guide to political action. The organic-intuitive 
method, which in its inception already originated as the fruit of a 

1 The most profound and significant of all these attempts is probably that 
of Georg Lukacs: Geschichte und Klassenbewusstsein, Studien iiber Marxistische 
Dialektik, Berlin, 1923 (cf. in particular the essays on 'Reification and Pro- 
letarian Consciousness', 'Class Consciousness', 'Rosa Luxemburg as Marxist'. 



HISTORICISM AND SOCIOLOGY 125 

post-revolutionary reflective period, will focus on the irrational 
phenomena of culture and be used primarily by conservatives 
intent on social stability. Such a distribution of roles is, after all, 
a regular phenomenon; it is one of the sociological laws of history 
that the same distribution of roles we see among the contending 
intellectual forces reappears once more at the level of the reflective 
historical interpretation of their struggle. 

This suggests that 'positional determination' of kno^vledge, 
culture, and life may also be conceived in a sense different from 
what we discussed above, that is, as co-ordination and aflinity be- 
tween styles of thought and life on the one hand, and certain social 
groups and their particular dynamics on the other. The philosophy 
of history which mostly treats historical periods as units, over- 
looking their inner difl^erentiation and stratification, must be 
supplemented by a socially differentiated view of the historic- 
social process as a whole, explicitly taking into account the 
distribution of social roles and its significance for the dynamics of 
the whole. No one social stratum, no one class is the bearer of the 
total movement; nor is it legitimate to assess this global process 
merely in terms of the contributions of one class. It may indeed be 
that one class carries, so to speak, the 'leitmotiv' of evolution, but 
the harmony of the ^vhole can be grasped only by taking into 
account the whole contrapuntal pattern of all the voices. 

\Ve see emerging, at this point, an entirely new dimension of 
historico-philosophical interpretation: the social stratification of 
the cultural process, and the identification of cultural trends with 
social classes; but we cannot pursue this subject here any farther. 
This emergence of the problem of cultural dynamics, which under' 
the impact of historicism permeates all cultural sciences, is re- 
sponsible for a remarkable change in the orientation of sociology. 
Sociology originally developed after the pattern of the generalizing 
natural sciences. Hence, it \vas only able to work with a general- 
izing method and had to ignore the specifically historical dimension 
of its subject-matter. The result was a purely two-dimensional 
juxtaposition of the most different social and psychological-mental 
relationships of all epochs and all peoples on the same plane, in 
one generalizing t^polog)'. Such a sociology was unable even to 
notice that only superficial components of the social process could 
be grasped in this fashion. This is not to say that certain general 
relationships one may discover, say, between science and religion, 
cannot also be instructive; some of the principal problems of 
sociology, however, are of a different nature. In any case, it can 
be foreseen that certain Hegelian ideas, ^vhich survive in Marxist 
sociology and also in the thinking of certain other schools, will 
substitute for the timeless, generalizing typology of social and 



126 HISTORICISM 

economic forms a unique, temporal sequence of these forms, so 
that a historico-philosophical element will be introduced into 
sociology. Such a change in orientation, however, should not 
surprise us; after all, all the cultural sciences are transformed in 
the course of the historical process. In literary history, as well as in 
the history of art, both the selection of problems and the methods 
employed have successively shown the influence of romanticism, 
positivism, Marxism, and so on. For these sciences, intellectual 
shifts, and successive re-patternings of the experiential substratum, 
are constitutive. This continuous transformation of the cultural 
sciences should not be considered as a defect, but rather under- 
stood as something inherent in their essence. 

The positivistic and the Kantian conceptions of science, which 
took exact natural science to be the sole ideal prototype to which 
all sciences, including the cultural sciences, have to conform, 
sought to constitute sociology too more or less according to this 
pattern. In spite of numerous valuable findings which were attain- 
able from this position, however, this attempt was doomed to 
failure: sociology also participated in the other forms of intellectual 
evolution. This gave rise to a multiplicity of sociologies which in 
the end could not be pressed into one schema. Then, the traditional 
view that a science can have only one true form led to the desire 
to punish sociology for not being able to show a unified method, 
by excluding it from the list of sciences. In our opinion, however, 
we must begin at the other end and ask ourselves rather: is it not 
more advisable first to see whether our conception of science is 
not false, or at least one-sided, because it is exclusively based on 
the natural sciences, before we reject a factually existing vital 
area of research, merely because it does not correspond to our 
conception of science? If one does this, if one observes the concrete 
historical development of the structure of the cultural sciences — 
just as, at one time, the methodology of the natural sciences tried 
to learn from the cultural sciences, instead of seeking to impose 
itself upon them — then one will not only come to see tht fact that 
sociology and all the other cultural sciences must necessarily 
always be written anew, but also discover the deeper reasons 
why this is so. 

v. DYNAMIC STANDARDS IN THOUGHT AND PRACTICE 

It seems to follow from the preceding analysis that historicism 
as a Weltanschauung reaches into the most remote corners and the 
most specialized problems of philosophy and methodology; in 
fact, it is a principle which pervades every phase of our world 
experience. If we turn back to the beginnings of our problem, 



DYNAMIC STANDARDS IN THOUGHT AND PRACTICE 127 

however, and examine not only what historicism means for our 
theoretical thinking and our conception of knowledge, but also 
to what extent it moulds our existential life (that is, if we examine 
the vital significance of historicism), then we find ourselves con- 
fronted again with the same problem of 'relativism' from another 
direction. To many, relativism and historicism appear to be so 
intimately fused together that they interpret historicism as a 
doctrine which says that, since everything in a sense is 'history', 
all action and decision is relative and lacks a standard. We have 
already pointed out that this can only be the philosophy of an 
unrefined kind of historicism which is not thought through in all 
its consequences. 

True historicism should also not be seen as akin to naturalism, 
which as a philosophy consists in drawing certain radical con- 
clusions from the hypotheses of natural science, i.e. of individual 
disciplines. Historicism, however, does not consist in a combination 
of findings of an individual discipline (i.e. history); it is rather, at 
least in intention, a kind of philosophy which goes even beyond 
epistemology and tries to secure a basis for it. Thus, its systematic 
place corresponds to that of the 'metaphysics' of earlier times. 
Only if historicism were nothing other than a doctrine of the 
instability of all human affairs and institutions, inductively based 
upon a comparison of the religions, customs, and the modes of 
thought of diflferent peoples, only then would it be a phenom- 
enon akin to naturalistic philosophy. It completes, however, its 
essentially philosophical step by transcending the specialized 
findings of historical science and attempting to grasp the overall 
inner meaning of the historical transformation process with the 
help of the category of 'totality'. In this way the series of causal 
chains (which within specialized science leads either to an infinite 
regress or compels the investigator to restrict himself to the so- 
called 'proximate causes' and, therefore, to break off the tracing 
of causal relationships arbitrarily at one point) is passed over and 
attention is directed to the self-unfolding substratum of life itself, 
the dominant 'trend' of which the philosopher of history under- 
stands. Contrary to earlier philosophical attempts, however, this 
characterization of the ultimate substratum is no longer deduc- 
tively based upon a priori first principles, but is derived from 
immediate contact with the historical material itself. Specialized 
causal historical research also has to presuppose in a way this 
'philosophical' substratum in which the overall historical 'trend' 
is grounded. It is absolutely necessary to be aware of this ultimate 
substratum if one wants to understand why out of a welter of indi- 
vidual causes just a few became effective in the total historical pro- 
cess — either helping or hindering the overall trend of evolution. 



128 HISTORICISM 

The question \\ liich concerns us no^\", hoNsexer, is no longer the 
methodological significance of historicism but its bearing upon 
systematic philosophy and ultimately upon life itself. In order to 
escape the threatening relativism, many who had accepted the 
principle of the all-embracing nature of historical genesis took 
refuge in the doctrine of the absoluteness of formal values. That is, 
these thinkers admit that the various individual acts in which 
values are realized may be temporally determined and in this 
sense relative; they insist. ho\vever. on the postulate that the 
structure of Reason guarantees, and permits us to assume, only 
one truth and, correspondingly, only an absolute validity of all 
other values as well. It is e\"ident at the first glance, however, that 
this solution in no ^vay overcomes historicism; all it does is to 
incorporate a new element, the experience of the fundamentally 
dynamic character of life, in the formal philosophy of Reason, 
which, ho^vever, still remains essentially static. Those ^vho proceed 
in this fashion do not really master the ne^\■ problems raised by 
emergent reahtv"; they merely try to fit them recursively into their 
old system. In this process, ho^vever, the stresses \\ithin the system 
must become still more acute and the doctrine of relati\'ism, 
owing to its being measured according to an inadequate standard, 
must appear still more disturbing. There is no more relati\'istic 
solution than that of a static philosophy of Reason ^^■hich acknow- 
ledges a transcendence of values 'in themselves', and sees this 
transcendence guaranteed in the form of ever^^ concrete judgment, 
but relegates the material content of the judgment into the sphere 
of utter relati\'ir\" — refusing to recognize in the actual historical 
cosmos of the reahzations of value any principle of approxi- 
mation to the transcendent values as such. In fact, as Troeltsch 
has seen correctly, historicism gave rise to relati\'ism only as a 
result of demands for an absolutely supra-temporal standard in 
terms of which historical realitv' ^vas to be judged. Only those can 
realh' concei\-e ever\- act of \'alue-realization to be 'relative' who 
refer these acts to a supposedly 'absolute' standard, and who, 
moreo\'er. define this absolute standard in such a ^vay as to 
deprive it of any intrinsic connection -with the material of the fluid 
historic process itself. 

Guarantees of objective truth ^vhich really can overcome 
relati\ism can only flo^v from material evidence, and \\'e cannot 
have the experience that our actual, historic, cognitive acts do 
point to something real, or that our action does have positive 
goodness, unless ^ve somehow have the certainty that the standards 
we apply in judging cogniti\-e truth or moral goodness have a 
bearing upon concrete realit\- as given hie et nunc. Or, to put 
this in tlie language of active life: only a mode of thought, only a 



DYNAMIC. STANDARDS IN THOUGHT AND PRACTICE 129 

philosophy which is able to give a concrete answer to the question 
'what shall we do?' can put forward the claim to have overcome 
relati\'ism. If a thinker's doctrine provides no ans^ver to this 
question, he may, to be sure, abstain from all judgment of value, 
for example, because his sense of truthfulness does not permit him 
to pretend to possessing solutions he actually does not possess,either 
in life or in theory. And one may ^\■ell expect praise for such 
veracity — but never recognition that one has at last propounded 
a doctrine which actually overcomes relativism. Concreteness, 
however — the only way in which one really can get over relativism 
— can only flo^v from the material, and thus ^ve need some guaran- 
tee of our material evidence. 

It is just on this account that the static philosophy of Reason 
was 'in its element' only during the period of the dominance of 
'natural law' ideas (\vhich still sundve in some 'static' schools of 
philosophy today\ That is, such a static philosophy could be free 
from an insoluble internal contradiction only as long as one could 
maintain that the assertion of the doctrine and of the ideal of a 
supra-temporal truth and of a supra-temporal ethical standard 
automatically determined the material conditions of the realiza- 
tion of these values. At a time ^\•hen one could still believe that 
there was only one truth and ethical rightness worthy of Reason, 
this being merely \'eiled by histor)* — and when one also could 
suppose that it was possible to deduce the full content of this truth 
from the principles of Reason — one possessed, at least subjectively, 
something absolute that one could hold up to history. Such a 
system could never disintegrate from ^vithin. ^Vhen, however, 
life itself, haxing made historical consciousness more and more 
po^verful, gradually undermined the static philosophy of Reason, 
nothing remained of the full content of the system except, as a 
residue and a gesture of resignation, the limitation of this supra- 
temporal absoluteness to form alone. The antithesis to a static 
conception of Reason arose when the material of vital experience 
became dynamic, or, otherwise, when the fluidity of this material 
was recognized. If one still attempts today to account for this 
fluidit)' in terms of a static philosophy, this is tantamount to an 
effort to master the antithesis by taking it back into the thesis. 
This is, ho\vever, clearly impossible; it must cause tensions which 
must eventually disrupt the system. One must unavoidably go 
through the antithesis, one must acknowledge that one's \vhole 
experience has become dynamic — and in this sense even a histori- 
cism which is still relativistic is nearer to a correct solution than 
the static philosophy \vhich clings to its formal absolutes— before 
one can find the solution of these problems in the synthesis. The 
solution, the s\"nthesis can, however, be attained only by making 



130 HISTORICISM 

the standard, the form itself, dynamic, and by re-defining the cor- 
relation between the absolute and the relative according to the 
new dynamic insight. Against this solution, even the classic anti- 
relati\'istic argument, repeated ad infinitimi and ad nauseam^ is of 
no avail — i.e. the argument (which in fact constitutes the only 
proof of the doctrine of the formal absoluteness of truth) that the 
assertion of relativity itself claims absolute validity and hence by 
its very form presupposes a principle which its manifest content 
rejects. This argument of the Platonic Socrates against the 
Sophists proves, howe\'er, only the untenability, the inner contra- 
diction of an unconditional relati\'ism and says nothing at all 
about the static or dynamic quality of the conception of truth. 
To say that the absolute itself is unfolding in a genetic process, 
and that it can be grasped only from definite positions within the 
same process, in categories which are moulded by the unfolding 
of the material contact of the genetic flux itself — to say this is not 
tantamount to professing relativism. What this position denies is 
only a subject which remains outside of the flux, never changes, 
and maintains contact with the flux only by a miracle. The ultimate 
substratum which unfolds in time has its truth in its progress. 
That it is accessible only fi:"om various perspectives is itself an 
aspect of this truth — and the plurality of these perspectives in- 
volves no arbitrariness, but merely the approximation to a shifting 
object from shifting standpoints. And if one should object that 
what we are saying now is put forward in an absolute rather than 
merely perspectivic sense, we will answer ^vithout qualms that we 
do not claim to have spoken the last word on this subject. In fact, 
what we say here docs depend on a definite perspective in that the 
historicity of the cultural phenomena we are trying to analyse would 
appear in an entirely different light from a different level of 
questioning and from another standpoint. Truth in a perspectivic 
sense means that within one historical constellation only one 
perspectivic conclusion can be correct. ^ 

1 How far our own account is positionally determined and how far we are 
conscious of this, we wish to clarify by a remark \\hich is essential to the thesis 
propounded here. At the beginning of this paper, we postulated a rigid 
methodological dualism bet%\een the exact sciences and the 'historical-cultural 
sciences'. This dualism cannot be the final form in which the problem of 
scientific method will present itself (and not even the form finally attainable 
for our stage of development). Ultimately a solution must be found which 
does not make this duaUsm central in the framing of its question, but which 
finds the 'point of unitv-' from \vhich this provisional duahsm can be surmounted. 
We find ourselves, however, at a stage in the histoiy of thought \vhich is 
so preoccupied with special disciplines and thus with partial systems that 
philosophical construction unavoidably slips back into one of these 'partial 
systems' and therefore into methodolog\' — even where this was not intended. 
We just 'see' thought still either from the point of view of the natural sciences 



DYNAMIC STANDARDS IN THOUGHT AND PRACTICE 131 

From these theoretical considerations, we may draw the con- 
clusions relevant for the problems of active life that there are no 
demands valid for all time, once and for all, but that the concrete 
pattern of the absolute is different in every age — and, furthermore, 
that in satisfying the 'day's requirements', in taking the 'next 
step', one is at the same time transcending the 'merely temporal', 
since this succession of steps in itself harbours truth. From our 
own standpoint, from our perspective, we can see the ascending 
path of this truth leading up to where we are, by consulting history 
and the philosophy of history. History receives its articulation for 
us from our instinctive aspirations and forebodings, and con- 
versely the evolution of concretely realized values which we ob- 
serve in the historical sequence leading up to where we are 
provides our vague and unenlightened volitions with a manage- 
able material on which to work. Thus, we derive from history 
value standards exemplified by concrete realizations — but we can 
derive them only because we have already grasped them instinc- 
tively, through our participation in the collective mind {Gesamt- 

or of late more and more from that of the historical sciences. If one wishes to 
go beyond this stage, however, then it is necessary to demonstrate the opposition 
between dynamic and static thought in one group of special discipHnes where 
in contrast to natural science, our over-specialized consciousness finds it 
easiest to recognize the dynamic element: in the historical-cultural sciences. 
In showing that, on closer inspection, there are spheres of thought which cannot 
be mastered from the earlier position, one will for the first time force recognition 
for the dynamic. That this way of gaining recognition for the dynamic depends 
on a particular perspective must be admitted, however, even by those who use 
this method — because it involves that one discipline is seen from within 
another. Our thinking is still to such an extent confined within partial systems 
that the dynamic is only visible for us in this dualistic contrast and in the set 
of problems which are thereby determined. This provisional standpoint alone 
explains it, too, that we maintain a pluralism of progressively-i'ational, dialec- 
tically- rational and cultural-psychic (monadically-unconnected) structures. 
Only when one overcomes this standpoint, which is based upon the specializa- 
tion of disciplines and methodological pluralism, and takes the dynamic drawn 
from the special science of history as a basis for philosophical construction, 
when therefore, a dynamic totality is taken as the point of departure, can one 
ask oneself, what the static 'part-systems' mean within that totality. Even in 
this case, the conclusions we have reached are not negated or destroyed; it 
will merely be necessary to show the possibility and interpret the meaning of 
such static 'enclaves' from a more comprehensive systematic position which a 
thoroughly dynamic conception will help us attain. That historicism has not 
yet solved this task must be emphasized rather than concealed. 

We do not depart in any way from our conception of the possibility of historic- 
cultural knowledge if we maintain that our own account has merely 'perspec- 
tivic' truth and is determined by present-day forms of thinking which are 
geared to special disciplines and their methodology. By calling attention to 
this, we merely characterize the overall situation which has made these prob- 
lems visible to us — but which already contains the direction of the next steps 
potentially in itself. 



132 HISTORICISM 

geist) active in history. This is probably the ultimate meaning of 
Troeltsch's demand that one should overcome history with the 
help of history (p. 772), and derive the values needed for this task 
from history itself. At the same time, this one proposition involves 
the complete reversal of nearly the whole 'axiomatic' system of the 
static philosophy of Reason, and this brings us again face to face 
with that contrast of the ultimate principles of the two principal 
types of philosophies which we developed at the beginning of this 
paper. We see how this one proposition implicitly presupposes a 
different kind of relationship between theory and practice, be- 
tween the philosophy of history and the theory of knowledge, and 
compels us to reformulate the alternative of 'absolute' or 'relative'. 
All those problems, however, with which the static philosophy 
of Reason was concerned are not simply thrown aside from this 
point on, but subsumed under a more comprehensive principle. 
The ultimate task in this respect is to re-interpret the phenomenon 
of static thought — as exemplified by natural science and by other 
manifestations of the civilizational sphere in general — from a 
dynamic point of view, and to ascertain specifically to what extent 
logic belongs to this sphere. Although this task has by no means 
been solved as yet, there is no reason for considering it as in- 
soluble. Similarly, the dynamic philosophy will also tackle the 
problem of the 'absolute' and 'relative' as such, already treated 
in static philosophy — but, as we have seen, this problem will be 
put in a much broader perspective in which the bearing of 
temporality upon the problem will also be taken into account. 
Thus anything that had been brought to light in the earlier system 
will still be preserved — but in a more comprehensive context. 
This peculiar revaluation, this preservation of the problem of 
absoluteness on a higher plane of inquiry, may be cited as an 
additional example of what we have meant by the dialectical 
progress of philosophic systematization. At the same time we have 
seen how the historicistic philosophy arises on the basis of a new 
attitude which is already supra-rational, and how its whole 
problem-structure is explicable from one single new element (fi^om 
the dynamic experience), the systematic consequences of which 
can be followed all the way to the most fundamental premises. 

Historicism is, therefore, in our opinion, the only solution of 
the general problem of how to find material and concretely 
exemplified standards and norms for a world outlook which has 
become dynamic. Historicism shares this insistence upon material 
evidence, among others, with the phenomenological school; 
whereas, however, the phenomenological school seeks and finds 
a certitude of values in the static sense, mostly by recourse to 
Christian-Catholic valuations, and thus once again approaches 



DYNAMIC STANDARDS IN THOUGHT AND PRACTICE 133 

these problems with a supra-temporal attitude, eager to set up a 
supra-temporal hierarchy of materially realized value demands, 
historicism does not claim to be able to ascertain material value 
constellations persisting beyond one given historico-philosophical 
period. The valuable in the phenomenological effort lies in that 
it recognizes that relativism can only be overcome by material, 
concretely realized standards. Its limitation, on the other hand, 
consists in the fact that — like relativism — it too is unable to 
incorporate organically the dynamic impulse. Modern phenomen- 
ology is compelled to try to surmount the relativity inherent in 
every historical valuation, if confronted with a supra-temporal 
standard, by concluding that anything that cannot be made to 
coincide with the objectively 'right' must either be an error or a 
'variant' or 'individualization' of the value, h)^ostatized as an 
absolute. As against this, however, the following statement made 
by Troeltsch seems to hold: 'There has never been a more objec- 
tive standard of valuation [than the dynamic one], and least of all 
one which, although theoretically defined as eternal, timeless, and 
absolute, cannot be applied in practice, either because it must be 
'individualized' in every concrete case, or because it can only be 
realized in an infinite progress — i.e. not at all. What such a 
standard lacks is only the admission of its lack of absoluteness' 
{Historismus, p. 162). 

And it is just in this admission that we see the strength of 
historicism; it implies a philosophy and a world-view which does 
not try to do violence to the new element which moves us — the 
dynamic — by treating it in terms of the old static system as a 
residue to be relativized, but attempts rather to place it right in 
the centre and to make it the Archimedean lever by which our 
whole world-view is unhinged. And nowhere is it seen so clearly 
as here that any definitely new fundamental experience demands 
a new world, and that our philosophy, our world-view and all our 
intellectual self-torture is nothing other than the building up of 
an intellectual cosmos centred around supra-theoretical realities, 
which the supra-rational genetic process in whose element we 
live, again and again places at the centre of our experience. 



CHAPTER IV 

THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY 
OF KNOWLEDGE 

I. THE PROBLEM CONSTELLATION 

THE term 'constellation' comes from astrology; it refers to 
the position and mutual relationship of the stars at the hour 
of a man's birth. One investigates these relationships in the 
belief that the fate of the new-born child is determined by this 
'constellation'. In a wider sense, the term 'constellation' may 
designate the specific combination of certain factors at a given 
moment, and this will call for observation when we have reason to 
assume that the simultaneous presence of various factors is respon- 
sible for the shape assumed by that one factor in which we are 
interested. Astrology no longer has any meaning or reality for us; 
the category of constellation, however, has been lifted from the 
descriptive and theoretical context of astrology, and, having been 
incorporated in a new context of Weltanschauung, it now represents 
one of the most important categories we use in interpreting the 
world and the human mind. It has happened in other fields, too, 
that fundamental categories were detached from their original 
context which had become obsolete, to be further utilized in a 
new theoretical context of their own. Although little has been 
done thus far to study categories of this sort, and although they 
have been practically overlooked in methodological investigations, 
we may say that it is precisely these categories which constitute 
the most valuable set of tools we have for interpreting the world 
and mastering the phenomena we encounter in daily life as well 
as in the cultural sciences. The categories of the philosophy of 
history in particular (e.g. 'fate') turn out to be of continuing 
fruitfulness, though in ever-changing form, and our interpretation 
of the world is always based upon them. 

The category of 'constellation', thus detached from its original 

(Originally published in Archiv fur Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik, 
Tubingen, vol. 3, No. 3, April, 1925.) 

134 



THE PROBLEM CONSTELLATION 135 

context, has proved particularly fruitful for us in the one field 
in which we still can make use of a genuine metaphysical instinct 
today: in the contemplation of the history of thought. While 
nature has become dumb and devoid of meaning for us, we still 
have the feeling, in dealing with history and also with historical 
psychology, that we are able to grasp the essential interaction of 
the basic forces, and to reach the fundamental trends which mould 
reality, beyond the topical surface of daily events. In this respect, 
even the specialized scholar is a metaphysician, whether he wants 
to be or not — for he cannot refrain from breaking through the indi- 
vidual causal connections between separate events and pushing 
all the way to the 'driving forces' which make the various indi- 
vidual events possible. Obviously, this kind of metaphysics, which 
is the only one that suits us, differs greatly from all the other kinds 
of metaphysics that existed in the past — -just as the category of 
constellation does not mean the same thing for us that it did, for 
example in astrology. 

Our knowledge of human thought itself develops in a historical 
sequence; and we were driven to raise this problem of 'constella- 
tion' by our conviction that the possible next step in knowledge 
is determined by the status reached by the various theoretical 
problems, and also by the constellation of extra-theoretical factors, 
at a given moment, making it possible to predict whether certain 
problems will turn out to be soluble. In the cultural sciences 
especially, we are convinced that not every question can be posed 
— let alone solved — in every historical situation, and that prob- 
lems arise and fade away in a particular rhythm which can be 
ascertained. Whereas in mathematics and natural science, 
progress seems to be determined to a large extent by immanent 
factors, one question leading up to another with a purely logical 
necessity, with interruptions due only to difficulties not yet solved, 
the history of cultural sciences shows such an 'immanent' progress 
only for limited stretches. At other times, problems not fore- 
shadowed by anything immanent to the preceding thought pro- 
cesses emerge abruptly, and other problems are suddenly dropped; 
these latter, however, do not disappear once and for all but 
reappear later in modified form. We can probe the secret of this 
agitated wavelike rhythm of the successive intellectual currents, 
and discover a meaningful pattern in it, only by trying to under- 
stand the evolution of thought as a genetic life process, thus 
breaking up the pure intellectual immanence of the history of 
thought. Here, if any\vhere, we see the saying confirmed that 
nothing can become a problem intellectually if it has not become 
a problem of practical life beforehand. If we broaden our field of ^ 
vision accordingly, then the problems implied by the category of 



136 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

'constellation' require us not only to achieve a synoptical view of 
all the theoretical problems given at a certain moment, but also 
to take the practical life problems of the same time into account. 
And then, our question will assume the following form: what 
intellectual and vital factors made the appearance of a given 
problem in the cultural sciences possible, and to what extent do 
they guarantee the solubility of the problem? 

Putting our question in this form, we may assert that the vital 
and the practical as well as the theoretical and intellectual currents 
of our time seem to point toward a temporary fading out of 
epistemological problems, and toward the emergence of the 
sociology of knowledge as the focal discipline — and also that the 
constellation is exceptionally favourable to the solubility precisely 
of the problems of this discipline. 

We shall at first try to characterize the constellation which 
gave rise to the problems of the sociology of knowledge, and to 
describe the fundamental currents which favour this approach. It 
is our belief that it is no wasted effort to ask preliminary questions 
of this kind before tackling any problem of the history of thought. 
We have to ask such preliminary questions, because our horizon 
has become broader and because our greater reflectiveness not 
only enables but also obliges us to avoid asking questions just as 
they occur to us, in a naive and unconscious fashion, but rather to 
pay conscious attention to the intellectual background of our 
problems, to the constellations which are responsible for their 
emergence. Such investigations also seem to have become neces- 
sary, owing to the particular way in which work is organized in the 
cultural sciences, namely the absence of any institutionally 
prescribed division of labour, as a result of which everyone seeks 
out his problems himself. In view of this, a synoptical orientation 
as to the status of all problems in this field becomes more and more 
imperative. What we need, however, is not merely a catalogue of 
the existing currents and trends, but a maximally radical structural 
analysis of the problems which may be raised in a given epoch, an analysis 
which not only informs outsiders about what is going on in re- 
search, but points out the ultimate choices faced by the cultural 
scientist in the course of his work, the tensions in which he lives 
and which influence his thinking consciously or unconsciously. 
Such an analysis of the work going on in the cultural sciences will 
give us the most fundamental characterization of the intellectual 
situation prevailing in our time. 

If, then, we ask ourselves about the ultimate, fundamental factors 
entering into the constellation which necessarily gave rise to the problem of 
a sociology of thought in our time, the following four things appear 
worthy of mention: 



THE PROBLEM CONSTELLATION 137 

( I ) The first and most important factor which makes it possible to 
ask sociological questions about thinking is what may be called the 
self-transcendence and self-relativization of thought. Self-transcendence 
and self-relativizationi of thought consist in the fact that individual 
thinkers, and still more the dominant outlook of a given epoch, 
far from according primacy to thought, conceive of thought as 
something subordinate to other more comprehensive factors — 
whether as their emanation, their expression, their concomitant, 
or, in general, as something conditioned by something else. 
There are considerable obstacles in the way of such a self- 
relativization — thus above all the paradox that a thinker who sets 
out to relativize thought, that is, to subordinate it to supra- 
theoretical factors, himself implicitly posits the autonomous 
validity of the sphere of thought while he thinks and works out his 
philosophical system; he thus risks disavowing himself, since a 
relativization of all thought would equally invalidate his own 
assertions as well. Thus, this position involves the danger of a 
theoretical circulus vitiosus. The attempt to relativize any other 
sphere, such as art, religion, etc., encounters no such obstacle; 
anyone who is convinced that art, religion, etc., depend on a more 
comprehensive factor, such as 'social life', may say so without 
having to fear being entangled in logical self-contradiction. In 
this latter case no contradiction can arise, because in asserting 
the dependence relationship in question, one does not have to posit 
the sphere of art and religion as something valid by virtue of that 
assertion; but in so far as thought is concerned, it is clear that 
one cannot relativize it without at the same time being a thinking 



1 What we mean by 'self-relativization' is by no means epistemological 
'relativism' but merely the opposite of 'autonomy'. One may very well assert 
that thought is 'relative to being', 'dependent on being', 'non-autonomous', 
'part of a whole reaching beyond it', without professing any 'relativism' 
concerning the truth value of its findings. At this point, it is, so to speak, still 
open whether the 'existential relativization' of thought is to be combined with 
epistemological relativism or not. In any case, however, we would like to go 
on record, at this point, that we cannot share the at present widespread fear 
of relativism. 'Relativism' has become a catchword which, it is believed, will 
instantly annihilate any adversary against whom it is used. But as to us, we 
definitely prefer a 'relativism' which accentuates the difficulty of its task by 
calling attention to all those moments which tend to make the propositions 
actually discoverable at any given time, partial and situationally conditioned 
— we prefer such a 'relativism' to an 'absolutism' which loudly proclaims, as a 
matter of principle, the absoluteness of its own position or of 'truth in itself, 
but is in fact no less partial than any of its adversaries — and, still worse, is 
utterly incapable of tackling with its epistemological apparatus the problerrLS 
of the temporal and situational determination of any concrete process of 
thought, completely overlooking the way in which this situational conditioning 
enters into the structure and the evolution of knowledge. 



138 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

subject, i.e. without positing the sphere of thought as something 
vahd. 

We may escape this vicious circle by conceiving thought as 
a mere partial phenomenon belonging to a more comprehensive 
factor within the totality of the world process, and particularly by 
devaluing, as it were, the sphere of theoretical communication in 
which this self-contradiction arises. To mention only one type of 
solution: if one maintains that the sphere of thought (that of 
concepts, judgments and inferences) is merely one of expression 
rather than of the ultimate cognitive constitution of objects, the 
contradiction, otherwise insurmountable, becomes devalued. 
To be sure, this way of doing away with the theoretical contra- 
diction is not immanent to theory, and if one — to put it in a 
paradoxical way — thinks only 'within thought', he will never be 
able to carry out this mental operation. We have to do here with 
an act of breaking through the immanence of thought — -with an 
attempt to comprehend thought as a partial phenomenon within 
the broader field of existence, and to determine it, as it were, 
starting from existential data. The 'existential thinker', however, 
asserts precisely that his ultimate position lies outside the sphere 
of thought — that for him, thought neither constitutes objects 
nor grasps ultimately real matters of fact but merely expresses 
extra-theoretically constituted and warranted beliefs. Once 
thought is depreciated in this fashion, inner contradictions (cf. 
Hegel) and paradoxes can no longer be considered as symptoms 
of defective thinking — on the contrary, such symptoms may be 
valued as manifestations of some extra-theoretical phenomenon 
being truly grasped in existence. Since ultimate philosophical 
principles are supra-theoretically grounded, the historical progress 
from one philosophical system to another is not limited to a kind 
of theoretical refutation. One never gives up such an ultimate 
principle because it is proved to involve contradictions; philo- 
sophical systems change if the vital system in which one lives 
undergoes a shift. It is, however, important to pay attention to 
these ultimate philosophical principles, because they are involved 
in one form or another in every investigation in the cultural 
sciences. 

If we look at 'relativization of theoretical thought' from a 
historical and sociological viewpoint, we see that it can be carried 
out in a great variety of ways, depending on what the entity is on 
which thought is said to depend; this role may be played by 
mystical consciousness, by religious or any other gnosticism, or by 
an empirically investigated sphere, subsequently hypostatized as 
ultimate reality, such as the biological or social sphere. In all these 
cases, the factor on which thought is said to depend is contrasted 



THE PROBLEM CONSTELLATION 139 

with it as 'Being', and the contrast between 'Thought' and 'Being' 
is worked out philosophically following the model of Greek 
philosophy. In most such systems 'Being' appears as a whole, in 
contrast to 'Thought' as a mere part; and it is often assumed that 
in order to grasp Being one needs a supra-rational organ (i.e. 
intuition) or a higher form of cognition (i.e. dialectical as against 
reflective knowledge). 

Now this relativization of thought is not an exclusively modern 
phenomenon. Mystical and religious consciousness has always 
tended to relativize thought in relation to ecstasy or revealed 
knowledge, and the doctrine of the primacy of will represents just 
one more way of solving this problem of relativization. 

If it were only a matter of self-relativization, sociology of know- 
ledge could have emerged at any time; the characteristic thing is, 
however, precisely that one single factor is never a sufficient 
reason for the emergence of a problem : what is needed is a whole 
constellation of mental and practical tendencies. The new and 
distinctive feature which our epoch had to have in addition to self- 
relativization of thought in general to make the sociology of 
knowledge possible was that thought was relativized in a particular 
direction, that is, with regard to sociological reality. 

(2) In our last remarks, we specified a further factor the analysis 
of which will help us complete the elucidation of the total constel- 
lation in which the sociology of knowledge emerges. After the 
self-liquidation of medieval religious consciousness (a type of 
consciousness which, as we have seen, contained elements trans- 
cending pure rationality) we see as the next comprehensive 
system the rationalism of the Enlightenment period. This system, 
which was the only one endowing Reason with real autonomy, was 
as such least likely to eflfect a relativization of thought — it pointed 
rather in the opposite direction, that is, toward an absolute 
self-hypostatization of Reason in contrast to all irrational 
forces. 

At this point, however, a completely different factor emerged, 
for which we can account only in terms of real, social developments 
rather than in terms of the immanent development of ideas, that 
is, to use an expression of C. Brinkmann, the constitution of the 
oppositional science of sociology. Humanism — the first instance of 
lay groups engaging in scientific pursuits in the Occident — already 
represented a kind of oppositional science; but this type of science 
reached the systematic stage only in the period of the Enlighten- 
ment which was about to prepare the stage for the bourgeois 
revolution. The systematic as well as sociological core of this 
oppositional science was its hostility toward theology and meta- 
physics — it saw its main task in the disintegration of the monarchy. 



I40 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

with its vestigially theocratic tradition, and of the clergy which 
was one of its supporters. In this struggle, we encounter for the first 
time a certain way of depreciating ideas which was to become an 
essential component of the new constellation. What ideas were 
combated is of secondary importance; what matters is that we 
see here for the first time a kind of attitude toward ideas which 
from that point on became the hallmark of all rising classes and 
merely found its first conscious, reflective formulation in Marxism. 
We mean the phenomenon that one may call the 'unmasking 
turn of mind'. This is a turn of mind which does not seek to refute, 
negate, or call in doubt certain ideas, but rather to disintegrate 
them, and that in such a way that the whole world outlook of a 
social stratum becomes disintegrated at the same time. We must 
pay attention, at this point, to the phenomenological distinction 
between 'denying the truth' of an idea, and 'determining the 
function' it exercises. In denying the truth of an idea, I still 
presuppose it as 'thesis' and thus put myself upon the same 
theoretical (and nothing but theoretical) basis as the one on 
which the idea is constituted. In casting doubt upon the 'idea', I 
still think within the same categorial pattern as the one in which 
it has its being. But when I do not even raise the question (or at 
least when I do not make this question the burden of my argument) 
whether what the idea asserts is true, but consider it merely in 
terms of the extra-theoretical function it serves, then, and only then, 
do I achieve an 'unmasking' which in fact represents no theoretical 
refutation but the destruction of the practical eflfectiveness of these 
ideas. 

But of this extra-theoretical destruction of the efficacy of theoretical 
propositions, too, we may distinguish several types. Thus, we may 
again point to a certain phenomenological difference — that 
between, for example, the 'unmasking' of a lie as such, and the 
sociological 'unmasking' of an ideology. 

If we call a certain utterance a 'lie', this also constitutes no 
theoretical refutation or denial of what the utterance asserts; 
what we say concerns rather a certain relation of the subject 
making the utterance to the proposition it expresses. The point 
is to invalidate the purport of the utterance by attacking the 
personal morality of the person who made it. In fact, however, 
the theoretical purport of an utterance is not invalidated by 
showing that the author of the utterance has 'lied'. It may very 
well be that a person makes a true statement and lies at the same 
time — what he says is objectively true but 'in his mouth', as the 
saying goes, the statement is a lie. Admittedly, usage is fluctuating 
in this respect; the term 'lie' is often used in the sense of a false 
statement consciously made. But even in this case, 'lie' as distin- 



THE PROBLEM CONSTELLATION 141 

guished from 'error' is an ethical rather than a theoretical category. 
The term 'lie', it appears, refers to a certain relation between real 
existence on the one hand and certain mental objects on the other; 
it means that we consider statements of a subject from the point 
of view of his ethical personality. Yet, it cannot be said that the 
'unmasking' of a lie is the same thing as the 'unmasking' of an 
ideology, even though both come under the genus of the functional 
analysis, directed toward the unmasking of a subject, of certain 
theoretical complexes from the point of view of their relation to 
existential reality. 

The essential difference between the unmasking of a lie and 
that of an ideology consists in the fact that the former aims at 
the moral personality of a subject and seeks to destroy him morally 
by unmasking him as a liar, whereas the unmasking of an ideology 
in its pure form attacks, as it were, merely an impersonal socio- 
intellectual force. In unmasking ideologies, we seek to bring to 
light an unconscious process, not in order to annihilate the moral 
existence of persons making certain statements, but in order to 
destroy the social efficacy of certain ideas by unmasking the 
function they serve. Unmasking of lies has always been practised; 
the unmasking of ideologies in the sense just defined, however, 
seems to be an exclusively modern phenomenon. In this case 
too, the fact that the social-psychic function of a proposition or 
'idea' is unmasked does not mean that it is denied or subjected to 
theoretical doubt — one does not even raise the question of truth 
or falsehood. What happens is, rather, that the proposition is 
'dissolved' : we have to do here with the existential corroding of a 
theoretical proposition, with an attitude toward theoretical com- 
munications which neglects the problem of their truth or falsehood 
and seeks to transcend their immanent theoretical meaning in the 
direction of practical existence. The emergence of the 'unmasking' 
turn of mind (which we have to understand if we want to grasp the 
distinctive character of our time) is the second factor — calling for 
interpretation in sociological terms — which represents something 
radically new, due not so much to the direction as to the manner 
in which theoretical immanence is transcended. The practical 
struggle of social classes gave rise to a new type of attitude to 
ideas which, at first practised only with regard to a few selected 
ones, later became the prototype of a new way of transcending 
theoretical immanence in general. 

(3) The emergence of the 'unmasking' turn of mind — the 
hidden history of which still calls for more exact investigation — ■ 
does not, however, suffice to explain why we have today a constel- 
lation permitting the development of a sociology of thought. We 
still have to mention two further factors which contribute to 



142 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

shaping the present-day variant of existentially relativizing 
thought. 

First, relativization, as we have characterized it thus far (in 
terms of 'unmasking' and 'transcending'), referred merely to 
certain individual items of thinking — it was still partial in its 
intent. Secondly, we have not yet indicated the terminus of the 
transcending motion, the absolute in relation to which certain 
items are relativized. And yet, as we said, thought, the immanence 
of theoretical meaning, cannot be transcended unless we put some- 
thing more comprehensive, a 'Being' in contrast with it — a Being 
of which the ideas are conceived to be the 'expression', 'function', 
or 'emanation'. But at this point, we still lack the point of reference, 
that ontological sphere of central importance in respect of which 
thought can be considered as relative or dependent. As we have 
said, such a centre can never be excogitated; it will always shift 
into that sphere of life in which the systematizing thinker as a 
practical subject lives most intensely. In earlier times, subjects 
who transcended thought 'lived' in revealed religion, in ecstasy, 
and so on; during the last, contemporary stage of the evolution 
of consciousness, however, the characteristic thing was that the 
sense of reality became more and more concentrated upon the 
historic and social sphere, and that in this sphere, the economic 
factor was felt to be the central one. Thus, theory in our time is not 
transcended in the direction of the religious or ecstatic experience; 
the rising classes in particular experience the historic and social 
field as the most immediately real one; and this is, accordingly, 
the sphere which is contrasted with the ideas as that of 'Being' or 
'Reality', in relation to which the ideas are considered as some- 
thing partial, functional, as a mere 'awareness' of something more 
comprehensive. This is a new type of ontological metaphysics, 
even though it received its sharpest formulation from anti- 
metaphysical positivism. That such a new metaphysics was created 
by positivism will, however, no longer surprise us if we remember 
that, after all, positivism, too, is a metaphysic, inasmuch as it lifts 
a certain complex out of the totality of the given and, like any 
other metaphysic, hypostatizes it as an ontological absolute. This 
hypostatized complex for positivism is that of the findings of 
empirical science. It is in line with the shift of the vital centre of 
experience into the socio-economical sphere that sociology was 
developed by the positivistic current. When in his later writings 
Saint-Simon analysed literary works, forms of government, etc., 
in terms of the socio-economic process, he specified that sphere 
which later came to play more and more decisively the role of the 
'absolute' pole in the direction of which theoretical immanence 
was transcended. When sociology was constituted within the 



THE PROBLEM CONSTELLATION 143 

framework of positivist consciousness, the ontologiciil 'terminus' 
of the motion transcending theoretical immanence was given. 

(4) But we still lack one feature needed for the full characteriza- 
tion of the contemporary constellation. Before the present stage 
could be reached, 'unmasking' as a method had to surmount the 
partiality which at first kept its exercise within limits. Although 
the aim had been, from the very beginning, the disintegration 
of the total Weltanschauung of a ruling class, what was actually 
achieved was merely the disintegration of certain ideas, the 
'functional' nature of which was shown in sociological terms; the 
ideas of God, of metaphysics, etc., were relativized in this fashion. 
This undertaking, however, could reach its final goal only when 
the interest-bound nature of ideas, the dependence of 'thought' on 
'existence', was brought to light, not merely as regards certain 
selected ideas of the ruling class, but in such a way that the entire 
ideological 'super-structure' (as Marx would have it) appeared 
as dependent upon sociological reality. What was to be done was 
to demonstrate the existentially determined nature of an entire 
system of Weltanschauung, rather than of this or that individual 
idea. That one could not, in this connection, consider ideas and 
beliefs in isolation, but had to grasp them, instead, as mutually 
interdependent parts of a systematic totality, this was the lesson 
we learned from modern historicism. Questions of detail such as 
that concerning the exact contribution one or the other epoch or 
school made to the emergence of this total vie^v of ideology — e.g. 
to what extent historicism is germinally present in 'Enlighten- 
ment', and how the romantic mind made a global view of historical 
wholes possible — need not be investigated here. We have to 
mention, however, that one most important representative of 
historical thought from whom Marx took over the concept of 
historical totality which enabled him to pose the problem of 
ideology referred to above — namely, Hegel. In his thinking, too, 
we encounter the motif of the self-relativization of theory, though 
in a peculiar modification. Thus, Hegel distinguishes 'reflective' 
from 'philosophical' thought; he depreciates the sphere in which 
the principle of contradiction is valid as compared to the true 
movement of the idea; he puts forward a doctrine of the 'ruse of 
the Idea' according to which the subjective beliefs of men are 
mere tools to help real developments along. In all these cases, if 
the one word 'ideology' were added, we should find the same 
fundamental conception as the one underlying Marxist theory. 
In both Hegel and Marx, we find mere 'subjective belief, as 
Hegel calls it, or 'ideology', as it is called in Marxian language, 
depreciated; this subjective sphere is deprived of its autonomy 
in favour of some basic reality. It is a relatively insignificant 



144 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

difference that for Hegel, who stands in the idealist tradition, 
this basic reality is mental, whereas Marx, who shares the 
positivist approach towards reality, defines this basic reality as 
the social and economic one. Just because this structural similarity 
exists, the category of 'totality' could play a crucial role in both 
authors: the beliefs of existent persons do not depend on those 
persons' social existence in piecemeal fashion, but it is the totality 
of their mental world, the whole superstructure, which is a func- 
tion of their social existence. 

It is only because of this aspiration toward 'totality' that the 
attempt to transcend theory with the help of the technique of 
'unmasking' assumes a specific new form, clearly distinguished 
from all earlier versions. As a result of this, we see a new type of 
the relativization, of the invalidation of ideas. At this point, we 
may relativize ideas, not by denying them one by one, not by 
calling them into doubt, not by showing that they are reflections 
of this or that interest, but by demonstrating that they are part 
of a system, or, more radically, of a totality of Weltanschauung, 
which as a whole is bound to, and determined by, one stage of the 
developing social reality. From this point on, worlds confront 
worlds — it is no longer individual propositions pitted against 
individual propositions. 

As we have seen, the problem of a sociology of knowledge 
arose as a result of the interplay of four factors: (i) the self- 
relativization of thought and knowledge, (2) the appearance of a 
new form of relativization introduced by the 'unmasking' turn of 
mind, (3) the emergence of a new system of reference, that of the 
social sphere, in respect of which thought could be conceived to 
be relative, and (4) the aspiration to make this relativization 
total, relating not one thought or idea, but a whole system of ideas, 
to an underlying social reality. 

When this stage is reached, the original emphasis accompanying 
the emergence of these new patterns of thought gets shifted, and 
many superficial forms of expression originally associated with 
the new approach fade away of their own accord. Thus, the 
emphasis on 'unmasking' in determining the social function of 
ideas can more and more be eliminated. As our theory becomes 
broader in scope, we are getting less and less interested in depreci- 
ating individual ideas by branding them as falsifications, decep- 
tions, mystifications, and 'lies' of a class; being increasingly aware 
of the fact that all thinking of a social group is determined by its 
existence, we find less and less room for the exercise of 'un- 
masking', and the latter undergoes a process of sublimation which 
turns it into a mere operation of determining the functional role 
of any thought whatever. 'Unmasking' consists no longer in such 



THE PROBLEM CONSTELLATION 145 

things as uncovering 'priestly fraud' and the Hke — one even goes 
so far as to rule out conscious deception in most cases ; the goal 
of the critical operation is reached when one has specified that 
the 'locus' of the idea which is to be combated belongs to an 
'obsolete' theoretical system, and, further, to an existential whole 
which evolution has left behind. 

The second 'shift' which occurs at this stage consists in a natural 
l)roadening of the aspiration toward totality. Once we have 
familiarized ourselves with the conception that the ideologies of 
our opponents are, after all, just the function of their position 
in the world, we cannot refrain from concluding that our own 
ideas, too, are functions of a social position. And even if we refused 
to admit this, the opponent would compel us to do so — for he 
eventually will also make use of the method of ideological analysis, 
and apply it to the original user. And this is precisely the main 
characteristic of the present situation: the concept of 'ideology' 
was first evolved by 'oppositional science', but it did not remain 
the privilege of the rising classes. Their opponents, too, employ ( 
this technique of thought — first of all, the bourgeoisie which has ■ ' 
achieved success and is stabilizing its position. Today, it is no 1 
longer a privilege of Socialist thinkers to observe the social V 
determination of ideas; this has become an integral part of our \ 
contemporary consciousness as a whole, a new type of historical 
interpretation which has to be added to the earlier ones.i In this 
connection, the salient point demanding attention is the fact that 
new methods and techniques of thought emerging in the cultural 
sciences have their origin in social reality, but later go through 
an evolution of their own, eventually losing contact with their 
social place of origin. At this stage, we have to observe how the ' 
content and function of the new techniques change when they 
lose their original social meaning. We have already seen two 
examples of this: first, the modification of the 'unmasking' 
attitude, i.e. the fact that certain given theoretical complexes are 
surmounted by indirection, by reference to a synoptical view of 
the historical process, rather than by the 'unmasking' of isolated 
items; and, secondly, the fact that the choice of the social sphere 
as a system of reference was first eflfected by an 'oppositional 
science' and then gradually became more or less a common 
possession of all camps. 

We may mention a third aspect of the natural expansion and 
evolution of ideas, i.e. the fact that the fundamental trend 
toward self-relativization (a distinctive characteristic of the 
modern mind) cannot stop at any given moment. Granted that 

1 Cf. my essay on 'Ideological and Sociological Interpretation', Internationales 
Jahrbuchfiir Soziologie, vol. I. 



146 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

ideas, theoretical complexes are relative to Being — it is still possible 
to conceive of this Being, either as an essentially unchanging, 
static, or as a dynamic one. Now it is characteristic of modern 
historical thought that it considers its last point of reference — in 
this case, Being — simultaneously also as something dynamic and 
'becoming'. Not only 'ideas', but also the 'Being' on which they 
are seen to depend, must be recognized as something dynamic — 
the more so as, for those who have insight, their own standpoint, 
too, is undergoing constant change. This poses the task of satisfying 
the urge toward totality in a more radical fashion. It is not 
enough to see that the 'ideas' of an antagonistic class are dictated 
by its 'existence', it is not enough to recognize that our own 
'ideas' are dictated by our own existence; what we have to grasp 
is that both our 'ideas' and our 'existence' are components of a 
comprehensive evolutionary process in which we are engaged. 
This overall process, then, is posited as our ultimate 'absolute' 
(albeit a changing and evolving one); conservative as well as 
progressive ideas (to use these over-simplified labels) appear as 
derivates of this process. 1 In our opinion, the present problem 
constellation necessarily implies this radical following through of 
these ideas to their last consequences; and the difficulties involved 
in this set of theses lead to the emergence of the problems of the 
sociology of knowledge. 

We have to go back to the point where the problems arising 
from social reality seek a systematic solution, and to review the 
possible solutions available at the various stages of the evolution 
of consciousness. 

II. THEORETICAL POSITIONS 

Thus far, we have outlined the constellation of those factors which 

1 The expressions 'progressive' and 'conservative' will be used later on to 
characterize certain thinkers roughly as a first approximation. They are by no 
means meant as an exliaustive characterization of the entire political personaUty 
of the thinkers in question. In tliis paper, we are merely groping toward 
'affinities' and 'correlations' between certain thought structures on the one 
hand, and certain reality-demands on the other. But it is clear to the historically 
minded that there can be no unchanging correspondence between a certain 
type of thought and a poUtical current, e.g. between 'historic' tliinking and 
'conservatism'. Most types of thought admit of a multiple interpretation, either 
in a progressive or in a conservative sense. This, however, cannot prevent us 
from investigating in concrete detail how in the real historical situation certain 
reality-demands allied themselves with a certain style of thought, and what 
changes of function occurred in this connection. As these investigations are 
further refined, the categories of 'conservatism' and 'progressivism' must be 
further differentiated and treated as dynamic entities. At present, however, we 
are concerned, as stated above, only with a first rough approximation of the 
'affinities' existing between reality-demands and thought structures. 



THEORETICAL POSITIONS 147 

had to be given together so that the problem of a sociology of 
knowledge could emerge at all. Even in this preliminary investi- 
gation, our approach has been primarily a sociological one — -we 
showed how an oppositional current of thought led to questions 
concerning the sociological determination of ways of thinking. 
Having gone through two stages — the first or preparatory one being 
the thinking of the rising bourgeoisie, the second that of the next 
oppositional class, the proletariat — these ideas have by now 
acquired a scope and urgency such that no one who wants to 
think in categories of a genuinely global import can afford to 
ignore them as components of present-day thought. 

If we look at history as a stream divided into several branches, 
and if we conceive of the history of thought as likewise split into 
several currents by some inescapable historical necessity (and any 
closer study of history can but confirm such a view), then we can 
easily be led to assume the extreme position that the history of 
ideas consists of completely isolated sequences of thoughts without 
the slightest intercommunication, so that, for example, conserva- 
tive and progressive thinking would each have its self-contained 
independent tradition of world interpretation. Those who think 
in this fashion are likely to adopt either an extreme Right or 
extreme Left solution to the problem of interpreting history; taking 
into account nothing but the historical route traversed by their 
own group, and the demands raised by it, they are totally unable 
to do justice to the function and significance of the ways of thinking 
of other groups. Now it cannot be doubted that sociological and 
historical theories, methods, and attitudes always come into being 
in close correlation vvdth the specific social position and the intel- 
lectual interests of a social class or group. Nevertheless, it must be 
admitted that after one class has discovered some sociological or 
historical fact (which lay in its line of vision by virtue of its 
specific position), all other groups, no matter what /A^/r interests 
are, can equally take such fact into account — nay, must some- 
how incorporate such fact into their system of world inter- 
pretation. 

Once this is admitted, we must conclude that all groups, 
though committed to their separate traditions, nevertheless seek 
to develop a comprehensive picture of the world, not ignoring any 
of the facts brought to light by any of them. Hence, the question 
facing a concrete sociology of knowledge is the following one: 
what categories, what systematic conceptions are used by the 
different groups at a given stage in accounting for one and the 
same fact uncovered in the course of practical operations? And 
what are the tensions which arise in the attempt to fit these new 
facts into those categories and systematic conceptions? We can 



148 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

put this more simply if we disregard the role of the a priori system- 
atic presuppositions in the thought process; what remains then 
is the fact that different intellectual currents do not proceed in 
splendid isolation but mutually affect and enrich one another, 
and yet do not merge into one common system but try to account 
for the totality of the discovered facts, each starting from different 
general axioms. 

This view of the historical-sociological structure of the intellec- 
tual process leads us to the conclusion that at each moment 
there are several different systematic philosophical 'standpoints' 
from which one may undertake to account for a newly emerging 
fact, for a new facet of cognitive reality. 

In fact, none of us stands in a supra-temporal vacuum of dis- 
embodied truths; we all confront 'reality' with ready-made 
questions and suggested systematizations, and the attainment of 
new knowledge consists in incorporating new facts into the old 
framework of definitions and categories, and ascertaining their 
place therein. We do not want to deny that 'class' or 'idea' are 
objective realities; still, they lack the character of 'stubborn fact' 
ascribed to things (also somewhat wrongly, as it seems) by virtue 
of which they would be given to us unquestionably exactly the 
way they objectively 'are'. That the concepts we mentioned 
('class', 'idea') are objectively real is proved by the fact that they 
stubbornly withstand attempts to doubt them and irresistibly 
impose a Gestalt-liko: pattern upon the spectator. But the question 
what they are will be answered differently, depending on the 
systematic standpoint from which they are examined. This is the 
reason why it is so tempting to observe how the discovery of 
certain facts (such as 'class', 'ideology') is connected with certain 
systematic and social commitments; how, for instance, the concept 
of 'class' essentially belongs to oppositional thinking, while certain 
'organic' concepts such as 'tradition' or 'protocol' have an affinity 
to conservative thinking. What this suggests is that certain 
commitments, as it were, render us sensitive to certain realities 
of the past, present, or future. Nevertheless, once facts have 
become visible, they are also acknowledged by the other currents 
in the specific perspective in which they appear to them. And the 
most tempting question is perhaps that of the way in which the 
systematic preconceptions of these other groups modify in their 
thinking the reality discovered by somebody else. 

All this implies, of course, that even specialized scientific 
discoveries are bound up with certain philosophical, systematic 
presuppositions, and can be detached from the latter only as 
regards some of their partial aspects. When new 'data' are being 
interpreted, the recognition of new 'facts' depends on the system- 



THEORETICAL POSITIONS 149 

making trends in a philosophical sense which just happen to 
prevail. As we have seen above, it cannot be stated once and for 
all what philosophical positions conservative and progressive 
thinking respectively make use of — these con'elations also are 
dynamic in nature. It has to be investigated historically and 
sociologically how long and to what extent positivism is a charac- 
teristically 'bourgeois' way of thinking; what 'nuance' of positivism 
becomes a basis for proletarian thought; in what respects the 
positivism of a successfully consolidated bourgeoisie differs from 
revolutionary positivism and materialism; how much of 'dynamic' 
thought will be appropriated by revolutionary and conservative 
groups respectively, and so on. 

We shall not try to trace the historical social genesis of the 
various standpoints from which reality is being interpreted today. 
Our plan is, rather, to choose one cross-section of contemporary 
standpoints arbitrarily and to find out what the different funda- 
mental principles are on the basis of which one may try to analyse 
a newly emerging problem today. For we seem to have reached 
the stage where the problem of a sociolog)' of kno\vledge, which 
up to now belonged to the context of progressive thought, is 
recognized as a 'stubborn reality' and is being tackled as such 
from all other standpoints as well. Having outlined the constellation 
which made the emergence of the problem possible, we now must 
face the further question: what are the pre-existent systematic 
positions in the thinking of various groups which this problem 
encounters at the moment when it achieves that status of 'stubborn 
reality' which requhes every group to pay attention to it? What 
contemporary philosophies, what 'standpoints' permit systematic 
work on this problem, and what is the specific characteristic of 
these standpoints? 

It seems that the most important philosophic-systematic 
standpoints firom which one may undertake to work out a sociology 
of knowledge today include the following: {a) positivism, {b) 
formal apriorism, (c) material apriorism (i.e. the modern phenom- 
enological school), {d) historicism. 

Properly speaking, positivism alone has given so far an ex- 
tensively developed sociology of knowledge, and this in two 
variants — one being the so-called materiaUst theory of history, ^ 
which belongs to the proletarian 'nuance' of positivism, and the 
other the 'bourgeois positivist' theory developed by Durkheim, 
Levy-Bruhl, Jerusalem, etc. Formal apriorism contributed merely 
an initial approach to the problem of a sociology of knowledge, 
without engaging in detailed historical investigations. One may 

1 Other variants of Marxist historical theory will be discussed later. 



I50 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

think in this connection of the various 'nuances' of neo-Kantian- 
ism which obtained recognition partly among bourgeois, partly 
among sociahst democrats. 

The most detailed discussion shall be reserved for the modern 
phenomenological school, material apriorism, so that we shall 
omit any further characterization of it at this point. A separate 
discussion will also be devoted to the philosophical standpoint of 
historicism which is eminently relevant to the problem of sociology 
of knowledge. Among the representatives of this standpoint we 
may mention Troeltsch and the orthodox left Marxist G. Lukacs. 

It is the debate between the last-named two schools (phenom- 
enology and historicism) which we consider as decisive. Before 
taking up these two positions, however, we shall make a few 
remarks about the two schools mentioned first. Our own concep- 
tion will be presented as the concluding section of this paper. 

{a) Positivism, which is merely a philosophy of no-philosophy, 
treats the problem of the sociology of knowledge as one belonging 
to a specialized scientific discipline. It is, however, an essentially 
deluded school, both because it hypostatizes one particular 
concept of empiricism, and because it holds that human know- 
ledge can be complete without metaphysics and ontology. 
Moreover, these two principles are mutually contradictory: a 
doctrine which hypostatizes certain paradigmatic methods, and 
the reality spheres corresponding to them, as 'absolutely' valid, 
thereby becomes a metaphysic itself — albeit a particularly limited 
one. Applied in practice, the positivistic doctrine has the conse- 
quence that in each particular field of research, the scientist takes 
either the 'material' or the 'psychic' substratum to be 'ultimate' 
reality, to which all other phenomena (e.g. intellectual, artistic, 
and other cultural ones) can be traced back. One variety of 
positivism — that which takes the economic sphere to embody 
ultimate reality — is particularly important for the sociology of 
knowledge. The adherents of this theory — especially those 
representing 'vulgar Marxism' — argue, first, that nothing exists 
except matter, and, second, that the particular stubborn-factness 
of matter is exhibited, in the social sphere, by economic relation- 
ships; it is in terms of these, then, that one should account for 
cultural realities. 

As a response to the decisive experiences of our time, all variants 
of positivism were basically genuine: from our point of view, they 
represent a straightforward reflection of the fact that the centre 
of our experience has shifted from the spiritual and religious 
sphere to the social-economic one. It was capitalism, with the 
intensification of class struggles it brought about, that was 
responsible for this shift of the experiential centre to these fields, 



THEORETICAL POSITIONS 151 

as well as for the fact that technological and scientific thought 
became the only recognized prototype of all thinking. It is by no 
means surprising that a philosophy which sought to provide a 
world interpretation with this type of experience and thought as 
its basic frame of reference based its epistemology exclusively on 
natural science, and in its ontology attributed reality only to those 
spheres which it experienced as real — withholding full theoretical 
recognition from those spheres which in its practical experience 
appeared only at the periphery. This defect, this one-sidedness, 
could easily be corrected; all that would be needed would be a 
broadening of the horizon which would permit a transformation 
of mere anti-metaphysicism into the positive insight that all human 
thinking is so structured that it must assume absolute Being 
somewhere — and hence must posit one or the other sphere of 
experience as absolute. More grave, however, is another defect 
of positivism, namely, that its unconscious phenomenological 
presuppositions are false, so that its methods are entirely 
inadequate especially in treating intellectual-spiritual-artistic 
reality. 

The positivist descriptions of reality are phenomenologically 
false, because its adherents — as naturalists and psychologists 
— are blind to the fact that intended 'meaning' is something 
specific, sid generis, incapable of being dissolved into psychic acts. 
They are blind to the fact that perception and knowledge of 
meaningful objects as such involves interpretation and under- 
standing; that the problems arising in this connection cannot be 
solved by scientific monism; and, finally, that their naturalism 
prevents them from seeing the relationship between reality and 
meaning in a correct way. 

Notwithstanding these strictures, we must recognize that it was 
positivism that first discovered and articulated the problem of a 
sociology of knowledge. And even though we must consider the 
methods and premises of positivism as no longer sufficient, 
because too narrow, we have to admit that this doctrine contains 
two points which reveal genuine experience and therefore still 
remain valid even for us. One is that positivism first gave a 
philosophical formulation of the fact that for contemporary man 
the centre of experience has shifted to the economic-social sphere 
— this is the 'this-wordly' orientation of positivism ; the other is 
its respect for empirical reality which will make metaphysics in 
the form of pure speculation impossible for all time. We assert, 
then, that substantively positivism has performed the essential turn 
toward a way of thinking adequate to the contemporary situation; 
systematically and methodologically, however, it did not rise 
above a relatively primitive level, since, for example it did not 



152 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

recognize the fact that its 'this-wordly' orientation, too, involved 
a hypostatization, a metaphysic. 

(b) The philosophy of formal validity represents a second 
standpoint from which one could undertake to build up a sociology 
of kno^vledge. All that this school has achieved, however, is 
merely a few beginnings of a general theory of a sociology of 
culture; and it is small wonder, in our opinion, that this type of 
philosophy inspired no concrete sociological research. For the 
philosophy of validity depreciates Being, as against Thought, to 
an extent equivalent to a declaration of complete disinterestedness 
in Being. This school mainly seeks to comprehend thinking in 
terms of thinking, that is, in an immanent fashion — as well as to 
give a theoretical justification of this 'immanentist' position. From 
this immanent point of view, to be sure, the phenomenological 
difference between 'being' and 'meaning', to which the positivist 
attitude is necessarily blind, becomes easily discernible, and one 
will be able to do justice to the essential difference between an 
act of experience and the meaning intended by it. However, if 
one does not go beyond this immanent point of view (as is the 
case with the philosophy of validity), this dualism will be hypo- 
statized as something absolute, and the second term of the 
relation — 'meaning' — will inevitably receive an exaggerated 
metaphysical emphasis. The philosophy of validity is chiefly 
interested in rescuing 'validity' from the toils of historical and 
sociological genesis, in preserving it in supra-temporal sublimity. 
But this causes a crack in the system: the sphere of theoretical 
'validity', as well as those of the other values, are h)^ostatized as 
supra-temporal absolutes, while the material substratum in which 
they are actualized is abandoned to the anarchic flux of Being. 

This philosophy remained self-consistent as long as it had 
enough courage to assert — as the philosophy of Enlightenment 
did — its unwavering faith in Reason, and, following the example 
of 'natural law' theories, to declare one specific position, with 
the corresponding derivation of 'validity', as the exclusively 
'correct' one. (Obviously, in doing this, one necessarily overlooks 
the fact that he is conferring 'eternal' validity upon one transitory 
stage of the history of thought.) But the inner consistency of this 
type of philosophy gets lost as soon as, under the impression of 
the historical variability of thought, all material propositions are 
given up as purely relative and existentially determined, but 
autonomy and supra-temporality is claimed for the formal elements 
of thought, such as the categories or — in newer variants of this 
philosophy — formal values. Sociologically, the former stage — the 
assertion of the exclusive truth of one material position — corre- 
sponds to the self-assurance of the rising bourgeois order which had 



THEORETICAL POSITIONS 153 

unbroken faith in certain tenets. When, however, the bourgeoisie 
was later forced to adopt a defensive position, the bourgeois social 
order became a mere 'formal democracy', i.e. it contented itself 
with asserting the principle of complete freedom of opinion 
and refused to make a choice among the various opinions. 
Such an attitude corresponds to the philosophical presupposition 
that there can be only one truth, and that that truth can be ex- 
pressed in only one form; however, the task of finding it must be 
left to free discussion. (In so far as this transition process within 
bourgeois democracy itself is concerned, it has already been 
described by historical analysis.) 

Philosophically, the defect of this position consists in its in- 
ability to account in organic fashion for the unity of being and 
meaning — a problem which inevitably arises within any system. 
Moreover, to adopt this position means to render philosophically 
a-problematic, and to keep out of the reach of historic-sociological 
research, precisely the most essential problems of a sociology of 
knowledge, such as the problem of the transmutation of categories 
and of the shifts in the hierarchy of value spheres, as well as the 
problem whether the present assumption of isolated, self-contained 
'value spheres' does not merely amount to a hypostatization of a 
transitory, specifically modern state of things. The only way in 
which adherents of this philosophical position could tackle 
problems of the sociology of culture, and particularly of thought, 
consists in examining the material substratum in which the formal 
value spheres are actualized. 

This approach, however, could not become fruitful. For if 
the cleavage between 'form' and 'matter' is made as sharp and 
absolute as this, matter is, so to speak, left to mere chance. This 
is also why this school could produce no material philosophy of 
history. Furthermore, if 'form' is so sharply separated from 
material actualization, all cultural products of past epochs must 
inevitably be viewed in terms of a present-day 'form of validity'. 
Since it is only 'matter' that changes, there is only one 'art', 
'religion', etc., and it is essentially always the same as today. This 
school overlooks the fact that — to use its terminology — the 'form 
of validity', actualized at a given time, is influenced by the 
changing material substratum, so that a transformation in the 
material sphere induces a transformation in the sphere of formal 
'validity'. 'Art' was not always 'art' in the sense defined by the 
school of Fart pour I'art, as one is tempted to assume; and, 
similarly, depending on the existential context in which it emerges, 
a thought does not always represent 'thinking' and 'cognition' 
in the same sense ^that mathematical and scientific thinking 
does, as the philosophy of validity would have it — unconsciously 



154 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

taking the 'form of validity' of scientiiic thought to be that of 
all thought as such. 

iii. sociology of knowledge from the stand- 
point of modern phenomenology 

(max scheler) 

After this brief survey of the contributions of positivism and 
of the philosophy of formal validity (neo-Kantianism) to the 
problem of the sociology of knowledge, we now turn to a con- 
frontation of two other schools^ — modern phenomenology and 
historicism — which will for the first time permit us really to come 
to grips with the decisive problems involved in providing a solid 
foundation for a sociology of knowledge and cognition. 

In our comparison of the two schools, we ourselves will adopt 
the standpoint of historicism in the form in which we think it is 
a valid doctrine, ^ and analyse the phenomenological approach 
from this point of view. Just as there are several different variants 
of historicism, it is possible to draw many different conclusions 
concerning the problem of a sociology of knowledge by starting 
from phenomenological premises; in our discussion, however, we 
shall not deal with phenomenological attitudes toward this 
problem that are possible in the abstract, but with the phenomeno- 
logical outline of a sociology of knowledge recently published by 
Max Scheler.2 

From the point of view we have adopted thus far, Scheler's study 
is particularly interesting as a striking illustration of our thesis that 
problems originally developed by a social opposition are taken 
over by conservative thinkers — and it also affords an opportunity 
to observe the structural transformation a problem undergoes 
when it is incorporated into the systematic framework of a theory 
based upon a different tradition. Here we have a concrete 
example of the final stage reached in the career of ideas first de- 
veloped in a given social environment — a stage where, recognized 
as 'stubborn facts', they are taken up by the adverse movement 
and are transformed by it. 

We may characterize Scheler's standpoint in a short formula 
by saying that he combines various motifs of the modern phenom- 
enological school with elements of the Catholic tradition. We 
cannot say without qualification that phenomenology is a Catholic 
philosophy (although Catholic thinkers like Bernhard Bolzano and 
Franz Brentano are among its precursors) ; nevertheless, in many 

' Cf. our essay on Historicism (above, pp. 84 ff). 

- Clf. Max Sclieler, Probleme einer Soziologie des Wissens, Munich and Leipzig, 
1924. 



TROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 155 

essential points it lends itself very well to bolstering up Catholic 
concepts of 'timelessness', 'eternity', with new arguments. By 
drawing an extremely sharp line between 'factual' and 'essential' 
knowledge, phenomenology offers concrete evidence justifying 
the Catholic dualism of the eternal and temporal— and prepares 
the terrain for the construction of a non-formal, intuitionist 
metaphysics. 

Phenomenology holds that it is possible to grasp supra- 
temporally valid truths in 'essential intuition' [VVesensschau) . In 
actual fact, however, we observe considerable divergencies among 
the intuitions achieved by different members of the school. These 
divergencies can be explained by the fact that intuitions of 
essence are always dependent on the historical background of 
the subject. Most impressive among phenomenological analyses 
are those based upon traditional Catholic values — our civilization, 
after all, is very largely a product of this tradition. It must be 
stressed, in so far as Scheler is concerned, that he has already dis- 
sociated himself from a number of Catholic tenets. This, however, 
is less important in the present context than the fact that he is 
still profoundly attached to the formal type of thinking exhibited 
by Catholicism. 

The main point about Scheler and his new essay is that he has 
a far closer affinity to present-day reality, and takes the obligation 
to count with new cultural developments far more seriously, than 
the majority of those who interpret the world in terms of the 
Catholic tradition. As a philosopher of a restless and sensitive 
turn of mind, impatient of limitations and rigid formalism, he 
cannot rest satisfied with a line drawn once and for all between 
eternity and temporality; he feels impelled to account for the new 
cultural factors emerging in the world. Affinity to the present, 
embedded in conservative modes of thought and experience, 
produces extravagant tensions in the structure of his arguments, 
so that the reader is in constant fear lest the entire edihce blow up 
before his eyes, the building stones flying apart in all directions. 
Since we are stressing precisely the complex problems inherent 
in the interaction of various standpoints, we are mainly interested 
in the way in which a modern representative of an earlier intel- 
lectual and emotional phase comes to grips with the new factors of 
cultural reality — a configuration of real symbolic significance. 
For the essential richness of the historic-social world process stems 
largely from the possibility of such 'anachronisms' as this — 
attempts to interpret present-day world factors on the basis of 
premises which belong to a past stage of thought. There is, 
however, a particular strain in Scheler's treatment of the problem, 
because he not only seeks to incorporate new factors into an old 



156 THE PROBLEM OI A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

framework but even tries to present the position of 'historicism' 
and 'sociologism' in terms of a philosophy of timelessness. 

We shall deliberately limit our discussion to this structural 
side of Scheler's theory, and select from the bewildering wealth 
of his insights only those points which are relevant to our problem 
of the various intellectual 'standpoints'. We are not interested in 
detecting errors or inaccuracies, but only in tracing the line of 
historical determination which made this type of thought fate- 
fully what it is. 

The main characteristic of Scheler's essay is — as stated above — the 
great width encompassed by his argument: he tries to analyse the 
sociological from the point of view of timelessness, the dynamic from 
that of a static system. We encounter in his theory all the points 
enumerated in our description of the 'constellation' underlying 
the emergence of a sociology of knowledge: (a) thinking conceived 
as relative to being, (b) social reality as the system of reference in 
respect of which thought is considered to be relative, and {c) a 
comprehensive view of historical totality. In addition to this, we 
can also observe in Scheler the 'shift' from the original 'unmasking' 
tendency to an impartial sociology; this is not surprising, since 
this change is even more in line with a conservative attitude than 
with an oppositional one. The question we want »to examine is to 
what extent a static systematizing approach can do justice to the 
dynamic and sociological — i.e. whether a 'timeless' philosophy 
can treat adequately those problems which arise from the present 
intellectual situation. 

Scheler, according to whom the sociology of knowledge has 
up to now been treated only from a positivistic point of view, 
proposes to approach this problem from another point of view 
'which rejects the epistemological doctrines of positivism and the 
conclusions drawn therefrom, and sees in metaphysical knowledge 
both an "eternal" postulate of Reason and a practical possibility' 
(Preface, p. vi). For him, the sociology of knowledge is part of 
cultural sociology which in turn is part of sociology — the latter 
being divided into 'real' and 'cultural' sociology. The former 
examines 'real' factors of the historical process, especially 'drives' 
such as the sex, hunger, and power drive, while the latter deals 
with the 'cultural' factors. Sociology as a whole, however, has the 
task of 'ascertaining the types and functional laws of the inter- 
action' of these factors, and especially of establishing a 'law of 
succession' of such types of interaction. Thus, we have here, as in 
all sociologies of culture, a distinction of the 'substructure' and 
'superstructure', but with the specific difference (this is the 'shift' 
characterizing Scheler's position) that (a) the 'substructure' 
consists of psychological factors (drives) rather than socio- 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 157 

economic ones, and (b) that there is a rather sharp Hne drawn 
between the two spheres, in contrast to the neo-HegeUan variant 
of Marxism. According to this latter view, the relation of 'sub- 
structure' to 'superstructure' is that of whole and part; both form 
an inseparable unity, since a certain 'ideal' configuration can 
emerge only in conjunction with a certain 'real' configuration and 
vice versa: a certain 'real configuration' also is possible only when 
the 'ideal' factors show such and such a configuration. Scheler, 
however, is unable to construct a historical theory of this kind, 
since he bases his 'cultural sociology' upon a theory of the drives 
and of the mind of man in general. This theory seeks to ascertain 
timeless characteristics of man, and to explain any concrete 
historical situation as a complex of such characteristics. And it 
also fails to establish a closer affinity with historicism when it 
examines in a 'generalizing' fashion the interaction of the 'real' 
and 'cultural' factors — taking it to exhibit a general law of 
succession, rather than a sequence of concrete, unique temporal 
phases. Although Scheler takes great pains to formulate a 'law' 
of the possible dynamic genesis of things embedded in an order of 
'temporal efficacy' (p. 8), it is clear that such 'laws' can result 
only from the application of the generalizing categories of natural 
science. This sociology is merely consistent when it tries — after 
the fashion of natural science — to establish rules, types, and laws 
of the social process. 

At this point, we should like to call attention to the fundamental 
diflference between types of sociology which are possible today. 
The one continues the tradition of natural science with its objec- 
tive of establishing general laws (Western sociology is of this type); 
the other harks back to the tradition of the philosophy of history 
(Troeltsch, Max Weber). To the former type, every historical 
individual is merely a complex of general, changelessly recurring 
properties, and the 'rest' which is not reducible to these properties 
is disregarded. The latter t^^e, on the other hand, proceeds in the 
opposite direction. It considers historical individualities — com- 
prising not only personalities but any historical constellation in its 
uniqueness — as the proper object of investigation. The individual, 
according to this conception, cannot be determined by a combina- 
tion of abstractively distilled, unchanging characteristics; on the 
contrary, the historian must and can penetrate the psychic and 
mental core of a unique individual directly, without mediation by 
general properties, and then proceed to determine all character- 
istics and partial factors individually. This is how we proceed in 
grasping the physiognomy of a human face; we do not combine 
general characteristics (eyes, mouth, etc.), but the all-important 
thing is to seize the unique centre of expression and characterize 



158 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

the eyes, mouth, and other features in the light of this central 
insight. The school in question holds that this method, spon- 
taneously employed in everyday life, has its application in science 
also and has in fact been unconsciously used by scientists; it is 
high time, then, to fix the methodological character of this type 
of knowledge. For it is not the case that the 'centre of expression', 
the particular physiognomy of a situation, the unique evolution- 
ary line exhibited by a sequence of events can be grasped only by 
intuition and cannot be communicated or scientifically objecti- 
fied. All such insight into wholes can be translated into controllable 
scientific knowledge, and the present revival of historico-philo- 
sophical modes of thought can be explained in our opinion by the 
desire to find a method of communicating what is unique in the 
historical process. In the sociology of culture, the attempt is made 
to analyse unique historical situations in terms of unique combina- 
tions of properties and factors undergoing a constant process of 
transformation — constellations which in themselves are phases in a 
genetic process the overall 'direction' of which can be deter- 
mined. 

Scheler himself seems to be aware of the fact that a sociology 
based upon a generalizing doctrine of the essence of man has 
already become a very problematic affair, since the general 
essences must always appear empty as compared to historical, 
concrete mental phenomena (one of the reasons why they can be 
sharply disjoined). Thus, he emphasizes (p. 13) that mind exists 
only in a concrete multiplicity of infinitely varied groups and cultures, 
so that it is futile to speak of a 'unity of human nature' as a pre- 
supposition of history and sociology. This means, however, that 
we cannot expect any essential illumination from the theory of 
essences, since it is now admitted that it can work out only the 
most general formal framework of the laws of intentional acts. 
Scheler, in fact, places himself in this fashion in the immediate 
proximity of Kantianism and of formal philosophy in general. 

But why this summary rejection of the thesis of the 'unity of 
human nature', after Scheler himself proposed to base sociology 
upon such a highly general doctrine of the essence of man? The 
answer that the supra-temporal unity of man (to be treated in a 
general drive and mind theory) refers to the essence 'man', whereas 
the 'concrete multiplicity' merely deals with the fact 'man' — this 
answer, though expected, cannot satisfy us. To a human mind 
existing and developing only in a concrete multiplicity, only a 
dynamic essence 'man' can correspond; in our opinion, one cannot 
think in historicist fashion in factual research and remain static 
in essential analysis. If, however, one should nevertheless cling 
to such an 'essentialist' doctrine of the human mind and of 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 159 

intentional acts, inspired by 'supra-temporal' aspirations, then the 
problem still remains how one can attain concrete historical reality 
starting from this position. The questionable character of static 
generalizing and formalizing is not eliminated by restricting this 
mode of thought to 'essences'. Generalizing and formalizing are, 
in our opinion, valid 'technical' procedures and also have their 
uses in sociology, since they can be employed to control the 
multiplicity of data; for concrete thought, ho\ve\-er — for the thinking 
of the concrete — they can serve merely as a springboard. Does, in 
fact, formalization not always lead to distortion, if we look at it 
from the viewpoint of the concrete? After all, a form is what it is 
only in conjunction with the concrete (historic) matter it in-forms, 
and it changes and grows together \vith change and growth of the 
matter. Those who engage in limitless formalization merely let 
themselves be guided — precisely in the sense of the distinction 
made by Scheler — by models and structural relationships prevail- 
ing in the dead, mechanized world of mere 'things', and the 
schemata so obtained obscure the peculiar nature of the living. 

Thus, we are at this point in the presence of a profound conflict. 
On the one hand, Scheler propounds a doctrine of the 'timeless' 
essence of man; on the other, he is a\vare of, and feels responsible 
toward, the uniqueness of historic objects. This conflict is possibly 
the fundamental experience of our time (at least within the Ger- 
man cultural tradition). 

Another thesis most characteristic of Scheler's doctrine concerns 
the 'law of the order of effectiveness of the real and ideal factors', 
already alluded to. The interaction of the two factors is described 
in the following %vay: mind is a factor of 'determination', not of 
'realization'. That is, what works can be created by a culture is 
determined by mind alone, by virtue of its inner structure; but 
what actually gets created depends on the particular combination 
of the real factors prevailing at the time. Thus, the function of 
the real factors is to make a selection among the possibilities made 
available by Mind. Through this selective function, the real 
factors control the ideal ones. Both the ideal and the real factors 
existing at a given moment are, however, entirely powerless in face 
of those real factors which are in the process of emerging. Power 
constellations in politics, production control relationships in 
economy, follow their determined way in a robot-like fashion; they 
are subject to 'an evolutionary causality blind to all meaning' 
(p. 10). Human mind can at most block or unblock but never 
alter them. 

What is fruitful in this way of looking at the problem is the 
fact that the peculiar phenomenological and structural character 
of the mental — which materialistic monism necessarily overlooks 



i6o THE PROBLEM OF A S0CI04.0GY OF KNOWLEDGE 

— is well seen here. Its one-sidedness, however, consists in our 
opinion in this, that Scheler does not go beyond the assertion of a 
phenomenological separation of the 'real' and 'mental'. As a 
result of this, the separation, and the abstract immanence of the 
'mental', remain unchallenged even when at last an attempt 
is made to bring about a synthesis, clarify the mutual relation- 
ship of the two spheres, and answer questions concerning their 
genesis. 

In order to illustrate the difference between Scheler's position 
and the one represented by us, we shall mention an example 
showing two possible conceptions of the mutual relationship 
between the actual and the possible, the real and the mental. One 
of these conceptions — toward which Scheler seems to lean to some 
extent — is expressed by one of the characters in a play by Lessing 
who says that Raphael would have become just as great an artist 
if he had been born without hands, since it is the artistic vision 
rather than the visible realization that matters. For such a theory, 
standing in the Platonic tradition, in which ideas and models 
are considered as pre-existent, realization is something secondary. 
And it remains secondary even in Scheler's more moderate version 
of this conception. Obviously alluding to the example just men- 
tioned, Scheler says: 'Raphael needs a brush; his ideas and artistic 
dreams do not create it. He needs politically and socially powerful 
patrons who commission him to glorify their ideals. Otherwise 
his genius cannot realize itself (p. lo). Scheler stresses explicitly 
that he has no essential influence of the real factors in mind, as a 
result of which they would in part determine the substance of the 
works. This conception — which in its essence still harks back to 
Platonism — contrasts with another one specifically rooted in the 
modern attitude to life. This modern conception is expressed, for 
instance, in K. Fiedler's aesthetics. We may paraphrase Fiedler's 
theory somewhat freely in the following way: neither the creative 
process itself nor the work as a complex of meaning should be 
analysed by assuming that the artist sees models before his mind's 
eye before he starts working, and that he merely copies them 
afterwards as well as he can. The truth of the matter is that the 
work and its idea come into being during the process of creation. 
Every 'real factor', every line already drawn, every movement 
of the hand not only determines those that follow but also 
creates new possibilities not dreamed of beforehand. All real 
factors, such as the structure of the human hand and gestures, the 
particular texture of the material, the organic and psychic 
constitution of the artist are the source of meaning in this process. 
Their contribution to the work is not without eflfect upon the 
'immanent' meaning it expresses. Hence, we should not merely 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY i6i 

say that the artist must exist as a man — and as this particular 
man — in order that an absolute possibility of the ideal world can 
gain shape (be realized) in the spatio-temporal world. What we 
should say is that the existence of the artist — determined as this 
particular existence — is itself a conditio sine qua non of the meaning 
and the idea embodied in the particular works. This new way of 
interpreting the correlation between 'idea' and 'reality' is also an 
essential component of our conception of the role of 'real factors' 
in cultural creation. 

For us, too, there is a phenomenological separation between 
Being and Meaning; but this phenomenological duality can no 
longer be considered as fundamental when we come to examine 
both terms as parts of a dynamic genetic totality — a problem which 
surely has a meaning also within Scheler's system. When we reach 
'existence' as an ultimate unity in Avhich all phenomenological 
differences are cancelled, 'Being' and 'Meaning' appear as 
hypostatized partial spheres which are ultimately the 'emana- 
tions' of one and the same Life. For any philosophy or theory of 
culture or sociology (or whatever one may choose to call the 
ultimate synthesis in question) which seeks to transcend the 
abstract immanence of the various cultural products and to 
analyse them as part and parcel of an overall life process, the 
phenomenological duality cannot be more than a provisional 
device. One should not object at this point that the historian 
engaged in positive research is not interested in these meta- 
physical questions, since he need not go beyond the phenomeno- 
logical separation of the spheres of 'Being' and 'Meaning' when 
he tries to give a historical account of the immanent evolution of 
ideas. This objection merely arises from a positivistic delusion 
which prevents us from realizing how deeply the supposedly pure 
scientist is engaged in metaphysics whenever he gives interpreta- 
tions, establishes historical relationships, ascertains historic 
'trends', or puts 'real' factors in correlation with 'ideal' ones. As 
soon as one attempts to explain a work in terms of facts in an 
artist's life, or of cultural currents of a period, and so on, he 
inevitably replaces the immanent 'meaning' of the works in the 
global framework of the life process, since he has deprived the 
works of their character as self-contained units and has been 
concerned instead with the central experience which determined 
the way of life and the cultural creativity of an epoch. 

We have to recognize, in the light of the foregoing, that there 
is something true in the materialist conception of history, accord- 
ing to which it is Being, reality, that creates the ideal sector. The 
error of materialism consists merely in its wrong metaphysics 
which equates 'Being' or 'reality' with matter. In so far, however, 

E.S.K. — II 



i62 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

as it negates the concept of the 'ideal' as something absolutely self- 
contained, as something that is somehow pre-existent, or unfolds 
itself within itself, merely on the basis of an immanent logic of 
meaning, or provides for historical or any other kind of reality 
the necessary stimulus that makes self-realization possible — in so 
far as it negates this concept of the 'ideal', materialism is right. 
And one cannot surmount this idealistic dualism if one proceeds 
like Scheler who combines with his idealistic theory a doctrine of 
'the impotence of the mental', a thesis merely reflecting the 
transformation which German conservative thought underwent 
during the last phase of its development. Conservative thought in 
Germany increasingly drifted away from its humanistic origins 
since the inception of the trend of 'Realpolitik' and power politics, 
and at the same time abdicated more and more in the presence of 
the newly emerging social realities which did not favour the con- 
servative aspirations. It is interesting to observe that the rising 
classes — whose aspirations are supported by the dominant 'real 
factors' of an epoch — consider these factors to be essential, whereas 
the conservatives, though they may acknowledge the importance 
of the real factors, can characterize their role and significance 
merely as a negative one. 

In one word, as soon as we abandon the platonizing conception, 
the phenomenological difference of the real and ideal factors will 
be subordinated to the genetic unity of the historic process, and 
we shall advance to the point of origin where a real factor is 
converted into a mental datum. From a merely phenomenological 
point of view (defined as one involving nothing but straight 
description of the given, disregarding all those aspects which are 
connected with its genesis) this 'conversion' of the real into the 
mental cannot be grasped, since according to this view the gap 
between bare 'Being' devoid of meaning on the one hand, and a 
'meaning' on the other, cannot be bridged. Since, however, we 
as interpreting subjects are existent human beings, and have an 
immediate experience of our 'existence' in which real factors are 
converted into mental data, we are able to push our inquiry to 
the point where the two spheres of the ideal and mental meet. 
As regards this conversion, moreover, it should be noted that 
many factors classified as 'real' are by no means completely 
devoid of meaning and purely 'material'. One is often inclined, 
for instance, to regard economic and geographical data as 
belonging integrally to the 'material' and 'natural' sphere. We 
should not forget, however — to take up only the first example 
mentioned, that of economics — that only the physiology of the 
hunger drive belongs to mere 'nature', but that this physiological 
substratum constitutes an element of the historic process only in 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 163 

so far as it enters into mental configurations, for example by 
assuming the form of an economic order or some other institutional 
form. This should not be misunderstood. We do not want to deny 
the fundamental role of the drives — and it is by no means our 
contention that economy could exist \vithout the hunger drive; 
but if something is a necessary condition of another thing, it 
need not be unconditionally equated with the latter. What matters 
for us is that the various forms of economic institutions could not 
be explained by the hunger drive as such. The drive as such 
remains essentially unchanged over time, whereas economic 
institutions undergo constant changes, and history is exclusively 
interested in these institutional changes. That excess over and 
above the purely physiological substratum which alone transforms 
the drive into a historical factor is already 'mind'. It is, therefore, 
not enough to say that economy would not exist without mind; 
it should be added that it is this mental element which makes 
economy out of mere drive-satisfaction. If, then, we constantly lower 
the limit of the 'natural' by refining our distinctions, so that the 
'economic' turns out to be 'mental' rather than 'material', then 
we must recognize two 'mental' spheres, the mutual relationship of 
which is that of substructure and superstructure. The question 
will then be how one sphere affects the other in the total process 
— how a structural change in the substructure determines a 
structural change in the superstructure. Now to be sure, if two 
spheres of the 'mental' are distinguished in this fashion, then we 
are of the opinion that the mind-in-the-substructure — involving 
primarily the conditions of production, together with all con- 
cojnitant social relatiotiships — does in part shape and determine 
mind-in-the-superstructure. For we should not forget that mind- 
in-the-substructure is the more *massive' factor, if for no other 
reason, then because it is the components of this substructure 
which create the enduring framework of the continuous existence 
of human beings — that which is generally called milieu. And 
since the 'conversion' of the real into the mental (the most 
mysterious event in the historical process) takes place within man 
as a living being, the greatest determining force is exercised by 
those categories of meaning in which the human being lives with 
the greatest intensity. 1 It is by no means the case, then, as Scheler 

1 Later on, we shall qualify this broadly 'economistic' theory from the point 
of view of a more comprehensive doctrine, that of historicism. It will then 
appear as something merely corresponding to one particular phase of the 
historical process — inasmuch as the 'vital centre' of man moves into different 
spheres of activity in different epochs, and each epoch understands historical 
reality most clearly in connection \vith the sphere in which it lives most in- 
tensely. Thus, the economism which is predominant in Marxism is historically 



i64 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

seems to assume (if wc understand him rightly), that a selection 
from among pre-existent mental forms takes place in the super- 
structure under the direct pressure of a purely 'natural' substruc- 
ture, i but rather: that which is vaguely sensed as being 'nature' 
converts itself into the various 'mental' configurations of the sub- 
structure, and in this fashion shapes, first, men as existent beings, 
and then, cultural reality as a whole (in analogy to Fiedler's 
conception of the co-determining role of the real factors). 

What we are reluctant to accept, then, is, first of all, the intro- 
duction of the 'natural' dimension of the substructure, as a supra- 
temporal, unchanging entity, in terms of which the historical 
process is to be explained in part. For a causal factor of this kind 
could give rise only to combinations of elements which are other- 
wise unchanging. To be sure, Scheler does speak of 'changes in 
the drive structure', but these can be interpreted in his system only 
as relative shifts, that is, mere quantitative modifications; thus, 
he suggests that it is the 'power drive' which predominates at one 
time, the 'racial instinct' at another, etc. In our opinion, how- 
ever, 'natural' factors of this kind can be used as a dynamic 
principle of explanation of the historic process only if we assume 
that they undergo qualitative changes in the course of history. Such 
an assumption, in fact, is made plausible if we remember that the 
'natural' on the various levels of its 'mental' transformations plays 
a different historical role every time.2 At what time and in what 
form the so-called 'power drive' can manifest itself — in fact, 
whether it can do so at all — depends also on the total cultural 
constellation which the various generations find themselves con- 
fronted with in maturing. In this connection, too, there is no 

determined. Nevertheless, it must be recognized that the fundamental explana- 
tory principle used by Marxism, the economic one, is rather powerful, because 
it characterizes the total process in terms of that factor which is the 'lowest' 
mental oiganizing principle of every social reality and hence lends itself very 
well to characterizing the structure of various epochs. 

1 We do not assert that the doctrine of the pre-existence of ideas we attribute 
to Scheler has a metaphysical import, and still less that it should be interpreted 
in the sense of temporal pre-existence. All we want to indicate is that Scheler 
teaches a logical immanence of the ideal sphere, and thus a separate and 
independent givenness of the ideal as something apart from the real. The 
function of the latter consists merely in making a selection among the ideal data, 
rather than in creating them in part. However, it is impossible to carry through 
a thorough-going parallel between our position and that of Scheler, since we 
draw the line between 'mind' and 'nature' at a different place. 

2 Thus a geographical fact, such as the insular position of a country, does 
not always have the same historical significance; its impact upon history will 
be different, according as we have to do with an 'early' historical epoch or 
with various stages of capitalistic evolution. The same natural factor performs 
a different function in different overall social and cultural situations, its 
'meaning' for the cultural process changes accordingly. 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 165 

eternally, self-identical 'power drive' as such which merely gets 
more or less repressed, but the identical expression 'power drive' 
covers a great variety of differently structured, differently 
experienced 'intentions of the will', having each time difTerent 
objects as their correlates. 

We are also reluctant to accept the positing of a mental world 
with an immanent logic of meaning vis-d-vis which the historical 
world with its 'real factors' plays only a selective role. 

We also conceive the relationship within the 'possible' and 
'actual' in a different way from Scheler. For us, too, there is 
at each moment that which is actual, surrounded by a horizon 
of possibilities; this horizon, however, is not the abstractly 
'possible as such', but contains merely that which is possible in a 
given situation as a result of a certain constellation of factors. 
This 'horizon', in turn, is merely the starting-point of a new process 
leading to new actualities; this always involves the completely 
new, creative role of the moment and of the unique situation. 
For our conception of the world, then, it is not the abstractly 
possible that is higher; the value accent rests upon the emerging 
and the actual. The real is not, as in Scheler's system, an always 
inadequate selection from a transcendent treasure of forms, but a 
creative concretization flowing from historically unique constel- 
lations. 

Only when av^c consider the actual ex post,^ i.e. after it has 
emerged, rather than in statu nascendi, as it would be seen from the 
viewpoint of the creative centre of the evolutionary process — 
only then can we view it as having the structure of an immanent, 
completely self-contained complex of meaning. Only those who 
focus their attention exclusively upon the actual, upon the 
finished product cut off from all functional relationships within 
the genetic process, can have the impression that what happened 
was the realization of something pre-existent, of a self-contained, 



1 It seems to be generally overlooked that the subject studying and under- 
standing history can look at the latter from various 'standpoints' which make 
a considerable existential difference. Thus, as suggested above, it makes a 
great difference whether one surveys products of the mind retrospectively as 
finished products or rather tries to re-enact the process of their creation. In 
our opinion, however, it is a mistake to adopt the 'retrospective' standpoint, 
and to try to account for the structure of genesis in terms of the actual as an 
accomplished fact, when dealing with problems of a metaphysic of the genetic 
process. (On the other hand, the problem of the 'standpoint' of the subject 
studying history is not the same as the problem of 'standpoints' in the theory 
of historicism. All historicism teaches a determination of thinking by the 
'standpoint' of the thinker, but such historicist theories may have a conservative 
or progressive slant, depending on whether they are conceived from a 'retro- 
spective' or an in statu nascendi standpoint.) 



i66 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

absolute entity. Since, however, cultural sociology is primarily 
concerned with reconstructing the functional relationships be- 
tween the 'actual' on the one hand, and the past genetic process 
on the other, it is in our opinion too risky for this branch of 
knowledge to adopt the premise of a 'pre-existent' world of ideas, 
even if only in the sense of a non-temporal genesis of pure 
'meaning'. It seems to us that there can be an immanent logic 
of meaning only for the retrospective view of the analyst of 
structure: once they have become actual, all works of the mind 
display an intelligible, meaningful structure. We want to stress 
in this connection that it is one of the most important tasks to 
ascertain this intelligible structure of meaning of a set of actual, 
finished works. 

We discussed Scheler's conception of the relation of the sub- 
structure and superstructure in detail, and gave a full account of 
our contrary position, in order to show that even apparently 
purely formal presuppositions of historical research depend on a 
valuational and social standpoint; we wanted to demonstrate in 
detail that in this field, too, the process of cognition, far from 
realizing step by step problems which already are there in 'pre- 
existent' form, approaches from different sides problems growing 
out of the living experience of groups belonging to the same 
society. Everything that distinguishes the static and dynamic view 
is somehow related to this central point — that of the relationship 
between the ideal and real. Since for Scheler the essential ultimate 
is something pre-existent, floating above history, the historic 
process can never achieve real essentiality and substantiality in 
his system in which the static, freely floating entities are not really 
'constituted' but merely 'realized' by the historic process. Such a 
sharp dualism can never lead to a real philosophy of history; and 
the fact that methodological decisions also are connected with 
metaphysical and 'vital' orientations is nowhere more clearly 
visible than here. For we now can understand why Scheler 
decided in favour of a generalizing type of sociology when faced 
with the choice which sociology must make today — whether to 
proceed in accordance with the generalizing method or seek a 
renewal on the basis of historico-philosophical traditions. To be 
sure, the case of Scheler is not quite so simple. As we have seen, 
a tension arises in Scheler's system owing to the fact that although 
his basic doctrine is one of eternal values, he yet recognizes the 
dynamic as particularized in various 'standpoints' and wants to 
account for it in terms of the basic doctrine. Both the wide scope 
of his plan and the unresolved juxtaposition of static and dynamic 
elements in his doctrine can be well seen from the following 
passage in which Scheler says that he intends to 'hang up', so to 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 167 

speak, the realm of absolute ideas and values, corresponding to 
the essential idea of man, very much higher than all factual value 
systems thus far realized in history. 'Thus, we give up as wholly 
relative, as historically and sociologically dependent on the 
particular standpoints, all orderings of goods, goals, norms in human 
societies, as expressed by ethics, religion, law, art, etc., and retain 
nothing but the idea of the eternal Logos, whose transcendent 
secrets cannot be explored, in the form of a metaphysical history, 
by any one nation, any one civilization, any or all cultural epochs 
that have emerged thus far, but only by all together, including 
all future ones — by temporal and spatial co-operation of irreplace- 
able, because individual, unique cultural subjects working together 
in full solidarity' (p. 14). 

The tensions revealed by this passage illustrate the internal 
struggle between Scheler's doctrine of eternity and present-day 
historical consciousness; the important thing from our viewpoint 
is that Scheler tries to incorporate in his system, not only alien 
theses, but also alien systematic presuppositions. For the historicist, 
entities do not exist apart from the historic process; they come into 
being and realize themselves in it, and become intelligible ex- 
clusively through it. Man has an access to entities creating history 
and dominating the various epochs because, living in history, he 
is existentially linked to it. History is the road — for the historicist, 
the only road — to the understanding of the entities genetically 
arising in it. But the abyss between the temporal and eternal which 
Scheler's system assumes decisively affects his theory of the 
interpretation of history. The real entities are supra-historical; 
hence, contrary to what Scheler says, history cannot contribute 
anything relevant to their exploration, or, if there is a contri- 
bution which history as conceived by Scheler can make, it can 
only be a somewhat limited one. 

History is in this system like a sea of flames surrounding the 
eternal entities. The flames may rise or subside; they may 
approach the entities or recede from them, and the rhythm of 
their movement, imposed by destiny, is shrouded in mystery; all 
we know is that some periods get closer to the entities than others. 
Fanatics of the Middle Ages, whose theory of history is based 
upon present-day romanticism, assert that the Middle Ages have 
marked the greatest proximity to the eternal entities, and they 
specify the culmination point within the Middle Ages at various 
moments, depending on the nature of their own subjective 
experience. Scheler marks a certain progress beyond this narrow 
glorification of one historical epoch, in that he maintains that each 
period and each civilization has a specific 'missionary idea' 
involving a close affinity to a certain set of entities which is 



i68 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

different in each case.i But he still essentially cleaves to the static 
conception of entities, for in his view, too, the eternal entities 
remain cut off from the flux of historical life, their substance is 
alien to that of history. All that Scheler admits is a principle of 
'access': some eternal entities are primarily accessible to just one 
cultural group, others to another. Historical 'synthesis', then, 
consists in a combination of all the essences discovered in the course 
of history. This way of looking at things, however, involves certain 
abrupt 'jumps' which we cannot square with our fundamental 
experience. Scheler's theory contains two such 'jumps'. He admits 
that concrete norm systems are historically and sociologically 
determined, and that at each moment man stands within history. 
But for him, all this applies only in so far as we are not dealing 
with an understanding of those 'entities' the realization of which 
is the 'mission' of mankind. In so far as these latter entities are 
concerned, historical man suddenly turns into a conqueror of 
temporality and acquires a superhuman capacity of shaking off all 
historical limitation and determination. This is one 'jump' in 
Scheler's theory. But we also may ask another question. How can 
we know in analysing history which of the entities proclaimed 
by various civilizations have been real, true entities? By what 
criteria can we judge that a certain civilization was mature 
enough to accomplish the 'mission' of humanity as regards one or 
the other entity? If we really want to assign such roles to all past 
epochs and civilizations, it is clearly not enough for us to have a 
valid, objective knowledge of our own entities; we must have 
supra-historical, superhuman intuitive powers to identify all 
entities, or at least those which have emerged thus far in the course 
of history. Thus, the historian of ideas in performing his essential 
intuition must twice transcend temporality: once when he 
identifies the eternal entities assigned to his own epoch, and for 
the second time when he interprets the past, trying to separate 
the genuine from the false, the real essence from mere subjective 
appearance. This, however, amounts to the postulation of an 
absolute intuition of essences — at least of all essences thus far 
discovered — at each moment in history ; or at least the postulation 
of the absolute character of the present moment. But then, the 
idea of a collective 'mission' o^ all epochs and civilizations, which 

1 Here, too, we can detect the essential difference between progressive and 
conservative thought. If a conservative thinker conceives an idea of humanity 
as a whole, his orientation is cosmopolitic, i.e. he calls for co-operation among 
different nations and civilizations, each conserving its peculiar identity. The 
progressive conception of humanity as a unit, however, involves inter- 
nationalism, i.e. a negation of these national peculiarities. The conservative 
wants multiplicity, the progressive wants uniformity; the former thinks in 
terms of culture, the latter in terms of civilization. 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 169 

would have afforded a starting-point for a philosophy of history, 
becomes lost again; the historical process as such is given up as 
hopelessly relative, and all absolute significance is concentrated 
within the second 'jump' beyond temporality. Scheler tries to 
incorporate historicist ideas into his theory of timelessness. and 
even adopts the idea of 'perspectivic' vision. But his static con- 
ception of eternity never gets reconciled with the alien 'standpoint' 
of historicism wdth which he tries to combine it. 

For anyone whose fundamental metaphysical experience is of 
such a (static) character, the sociology of knowledge — as well as 
of all other spheres of culture — must become a totally secondary 
affair. Accordingly, the real task of a sociology of thought — which 
in our opinion consists in discovering the overall line of develop- 
ment by following the genesis of the various 'standpoints' — is never 
formulated by Scheler. 

One more objection must be made to Scheler's doctrine of 
essences. He forgets that any understanding and interpretation 
of essences (and hence also of the essences of past epochs) is 
possible only in perspective fashion. Both what is accessible to us 
of the essential intuitions of past epochs, and how they become 
accessible to us, depends on our own standpoint. 

Each 'element of significance' (if we can speak of such a thing 
in isolation) is determined by the entire context of significance, 
and ultimately by the vital basis which gives rise to it; this is an 
insight we owe to historicism. Thus, an act of understanding 
consists in incorporating an alien 'element of significance' into 
our own context of significance, cancelling its original functional 
relationships and working it into our own function pattern. This 
is how we proceed in ascertaining not only the facts, but also the 
intentionally assigned 'meanings' of past epochs. It would be a 
'technicist' prejudice to assume that we could integrate mental 
data (meanings) into a totality by adding one piece to another. 
It should not be difficult to convince Scheler of the correctness of 
this view, since he himself distinguishes several types of knowledge 
and several types of cognitive progress (p. 23). An 'additive' 
knowledge of intelligible essences would be possible only if 
essential knowledge were of the type of technicist, 'cumulative' 
knowledge (as Scheler calls it). According to Scheler himself, 
essential knowledge belongs to a type of knowledge limited to just 
one culture; but if this is so, it seems to us that knowledge of the 
meanings and essences of past epochs can only be a perspectivic 
one, determined by our historic-existential standpoint on the one 
hand and by our basic axiom system on the other. In another 
paper, ^ we have already pointed out that a sharp characterization 
1 'Historicism', pp. 84 ff. 



lyo THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

of the fundamental difference between scientific-technological 
rationality and philosophical knowledge, and between the patterns 
of evolution existing in these two fields, becomes possible only if 
one goes back to the systematizing structural principle underlying them. 
As we have tried to show, scientific-technological thought differs 
from philosophical thought in that the former type of thought 
completes just one and the same system during successive periods, 
whereas the latter starts from new centres of systematization in 
every epoch in trying to master the increasing multiplicity of the 
historical world. Because it is the same system that is being built 
up in science in the course of the centuries, the phenomenon of 
change of meaning does not occur in this sphere, and we can 
picture the process of thought as direct progress toward ulti- 
mately 'coiTect' knowledge which can be formulated only in one 
fashion. In physics, there are not several different concepts of 
'force', and if different concepts do appear in the history of physics, 
one can classify them as mere preparatory steps before the discovery 
of the correct concept prescribed by the axiomatic pattern of the 
system. As against this, we have in philosophy, as well as in 
the historic-cultural sciences which are closely related to it, the 
phenomenon of an intrinsically necessary change of meaning. 
Every concept in these fields inevitably changes its meaning in 
the course of time — and this precisely because it continually 
enters into new systems depending on new sets of axioms. (We 
may, for example, think of the way in which the concept of 'idea' 
has altered its meaning: what it meant for each epoch can be 
understood by going back to the total systems in the framework 
of which the concept was defined.) If we observe the historical 
line of evolution in these fields, as well as the mutual relationships 
of the meanings succeeding each other, then we can observe no 
'progress' toward a unique system, one exclusively correct meaning 
of the concept, but rather the phenomenon of 'sublimation' 
{Aufheben). This 'sublimation' consists in the fact that in these 
fields every later and 'higher' system incorporates the earlier 
systems and functional relationships and also the individual 
concepts belonging to those systems. However, when this happens, 
the earlier principles of systematization which are reflected in the 
various concepts are cancelled and the 'elements' taken over from 
earlier systems are re-interpreted in terms of a higher and more 
comprehensive system, i.e. 'sublimated'. We can keep apart the 
two types of thought (scientific and philosophic-historical) only 
by paying attention to this fundamental difference in system- 
building; this is the only way to recognize that. A genuine 
historical synthesis of past cultures cannot consist in a non- 
perspectivic addition of successively appearing phenomena but 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 171 

only in an ever-renewed attempt to incorporate the entities taken 
over from the past in a new system. The actual, historically 
observable evolution of thought in philosophy (as well as in the 
related cultural sciences) shows a pattern contrasting — as we have 
seen — with the pattern of evolution in the natural sciences — we 
described this pattern earlier^ as a 'dialectical' one, and Scheler 
now proposes to designate it as 'cultural growth by interweaving 
and incorporation of existing mental structures in a new structure' 
(p. 24). The essential point — regardless of terminological differ- 
ences — is, however, that in the case under consideration human 
thought is organized around a new centre in every epoch, and even 
though man does 'sublimate' (in the Hegelian sense of aufheben) 
his earlier concepts by incorporating them into ever new systems, 
this involves a change in meaning making an additive synthesis 
impossible. Once it is admitted that philosophical knowledge is 
existentially determined and limited to one specific civilization, 
\ then it is no longer possible to assume anything but a dynamic 
system in this sphere of thought, for otherwise we should be dealing 
with concepts of one structural type in terms of a different struc- 
ture. This being granted, perspectivism alone will be possible, 
i.e. the theory that the various essential meanings come into being 
together with the epochs to which they belong; these essential 
meanings belong to essences which have their own being in an 
absolute sense, but the student of history can comprehend them 
only in perspectivic fashion, looking at them from a standpoint 
which is itself a product of history. This kind of perspectivism, 
however, is by no means self-refuting, contrary to what Scheler 
says in his criticism of our views (pp. 115 ff.), because — in our 
opinion at least — both the various epochs and the essences coming 
into being in them have their own being regardless of any know- 
ledge of them that may subsequently be achieved. As we said in 
a passage of our essay on Historicism quoted by Scheler: 'The 
historical-subject matter (the historical content, so to speak, of an 
epoch) remains identical ^'in itself", but it belongs to the essential 
conditions of its cognizability that it can be grasped only from 
differing intellectual-historical standpoints— or, in other words, 
that we can view only various "aspects" of it' (p. 105). The 
italicized words of this sentence indicate clearly enough that it is 
not our intention to use perspectivism as a means to dissolve the 
real being in se of the objects of historical inquiry; that would, 
indeed, be rightly construed by Scheler as a self-refuting view. 
Thus, the essence and the actual existence of Hellenism do not 
dissolve themselves into the various 'perspectives' opened up by 
successive generations of historical scholarship. It is, in fact, 
1 Cf. the essay on 'Historicism', in this volume, pp. 84 ff. 



172 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

'given' as a 'thing in itself, approached from various sides, as it 
were, by different interpretations. We are justified in positing this 
real being of the object in se, for even though no single perspective 
can do it full justice, it is still given as a control we may use in 
ruling out arbitrary characterizations. 

To mention an example by means of which we can illustrate 
the meaning of perspectivism most clearly: human consciousness 
can grasp a landscape as landscape only from various perspectives; 
and yet the landscape does not dissolve itself into its various 
possible pictorial representations. Each of the possible pictures has 
a 'real' counterpart and the correctness of each perspective can 
be controlled from the other perspectives. This implies, however, 
that history is only visible from within history and cannot be 
interpreted through a 'jump' beyond history, in occupying a 
static standpoint arbitrarily occupied outside history. The histori- 
cist standpoint, which starts with relativism, eventually achieves 
an absoluteness of view, because in its final form it posits history 
itself as the Absolute; this alone makes it possible that the various 
standpoints, which at first appear to be anarchic, can be ordered 
as component parts of a meaningful overall process. 

In fact, if we look back upon a relatively closed epoch of history, 
such as the period of early capitalism as far as the emergence of 
fully developed capitalist systems, we can perceive the meaningful 
direction in which the line of development points. We then can 
interpret all the sociological and other theoretical 'standpoints' 
belonging to that epoch in terms of this inherent goal-directedness. 
To be sure, each theory claimed absolute validity when first 
propounded; we, however, are in a position to estimate its relative 
truth and its potentiality. Fruitful past theories, however, are 
justified even in retrospect, because they can survive as problems 
and components of the more comprehensive system in terms of 
which we think today. At the same time, however, they are 
relativized, because they can survive only as parts of a more 
comprehensive system. Now we do not want to deny that his- 
toricism does encounter difficulties — and they arise precisely at 
this point. For while we can see the meaning, the goal-directed- 
ness of the overall development in so far as closed periods are 
concerned, we cannot see such a goal-meaning for our own period. 
Since the future is always a secret, we can only make conjectures 
about the total pattern of meaning of which our present is a part; 
and since we can have nothing more than conjectures, it is under- 
standable enough that each current of thought assumes that the 
goal-meaning of the present is identical with those contemporary 
trends with which that current happens to identify itself. Thus, 
the future goal-meaning of the totality of history will be seen 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 173 

differently, according to what particular point one occupies in 
the total process; the history of philosophy of a progressive author 
will differ from that of a conservative one, and so on. 

If we pursue this train of thought farther, we shall even con- 
clude that epochs such as those we have just described as relatively 
closed and therefore transparent as to their goal-meaning (such as 
early capitalism) may to some extent lose their definiteness of 
meaning and become problematic if they are inserted in more 
comprehensive genetic patterns. It follows from this that each 
historical theory belongs essentially to a given standpoint ; but 
this does not mean — a point we want to stress — that the \vhole 
concreteness, 'stubbom-factness' of the data and essential mean- 
ings is dissolved into a number of various perspectives. Every one 
of us refers to the same data and essences. To be sure, as we have 
seen in our introductory chapter, a given movement can discover 
only a limited range of facts — those which come within the pur- 
view of its reflectiveness — but once these facts have been made 
visible, every one is obliged to take them into account. Moreover, 
we understand, looking at things from our perspective, the 
possibility and necessity of the other perspectives; and no matter 
what our perspective is, we all experience the controlling 'stub- 
bornness' of the data; thus, we all have every reason to assume that 
we move in the medium of reality, so that we can disclaim all 
illusionism. 

One might ask at this point why we do not content ourselves 
with just recording those facts we ourselves recognize as stubborn 
— as positivism \vould have it; why we do not eliminate those 
'totalities of meaning' and additions to mere factuality which 
alone lead to perspectivism, as a metaphysical residue which is 
of no concern to positive science. Our answer is that there is 
something peculiar about the 'stubbornness', the 'positivity' of 
those 'facts'. They are 'stubborn' in the sense that they constitute 
a control we may use in ruling out arbitrary constructions. But 
they are not 'stubborn' in the sense that they can be gi-asped 
outside any system, in isolation, without reference to meanings. 
On the contrary, we can gi-asp them only within the framework 
of a meaning, and they show a different aspect, depending on 
the meaning pattern within which they are apprehended. Terms 
such as 'capitalism', 'proletariat', etc., change their meaning, 
according to which system they are used in, and historical 'data' 
become historical 'facts' only by being inserted into an evolution- 
ary process as 'parts' or 'stages'. 

That carefree, self-assured epoch of positivism in \vhich it was 
possible to assume that one could ascertain 'facts' without 
qualification is now over; one could assume this only because one 



174 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

overlooked that the positivist history of culture naively took just 
one system of meaning, one particular metaphysic to be abso- 
lutely valid — although only thinkers of that one epoch could 
accept them as a-problematical. Positivism could successfully con- 
ceal its own framework of meanings from itself only because it 
cultivated nothing but specialized research in one or the other 
field; under these circumstances, the fact that the metaphysical 
presuppositions made by specialized scientists in their particular 
fields were based upon a global outlook and upon a philosophy 
of history, no less than those of non-positivist schools, could not be 
noticed by anyone. We, on the other hand, can see already that 
at least the cultural and historical sciences presuppose metaphysics, 
that is, an increment that turns partial aspects into totalities; and 
in our opinion, it is altogether more fruitful to acknowledge than 
to ignore this state of things. 

As stated above, however, this does not mean that we shall be 
unaffected by those aspects of positivism which were 'genuine', 
and by virtue of which it marked a real progress in the history of 
thought. Every metaphysics that will emerge after the supremacy 
of positivism will have to incorporate and 'sublimate' in some form 
these 'genuine' elements of positivism. This 'genuine' component, 
however, is not a matter of the epistemological and methodological 
position of positivism, but, paradoxical as it may sound, of its 
metaphysical intention, of the vital feeling of which it is the 
theoretical expression. The positivist style of thought marks in 
the history of theoretical disciplines the same gradual transition 
which, in the field of politics, is designated by the term 'Real- 
politik\ and in that of art, by the term 'realism'— a transition which 
left its mark both upon conservative and progressive thought. 
These terms suggest that certain spheres of life (e.g. economics) 
more and more occupy the centre of experience and provide the 
fundamental categories in terms of which all other spheres are 
experienced. The transition in question means that in our 
experience, the ontological stress is upon 'this-worldliness', 'im- 
manence', rather than 'transcendence'. We seek the origin of all 
'transcendent' concepts in just this 'immanent' experience. It may 
be noted, however, that this antithesis between 'immanence' and 
'transcendence' is itself still expressed in the terminology of the 
old vital attitude and hence cannot do full justice to what is 
essentially new and genuine in positivism. 

What we called the positivist respect for empirical reality 
represents a second positivist principle which, we think, remains 
valid for our thinking. This respect for empirical reality (which, 
however, no longer means for us the belief in a non-metaphysical 
interpretation of mental facts) consists in this, that we cannot 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 175 

conceive of metaphysical entities outside of an essential contact 
with that realm of experience which for us represents the ultimate 
reality of the world. This is the main reason why we cannot 
accept any 'jump' beyond reality — not even in connection 
with the construction of a pre-existent realm of truth and validity. 
We do not claim to be able to make any deductions concerning 
structures of truth and validity, except from the empirically 
ascertainable transformation of the structure of the various spheres 
of thought, as encountered within history. All essential types of 
the new metaphysics bear the imprint of this process of transfor- 
mation which results in a steady heightening of the ontological 
rank of the 'immanent' and 'historical'. It was possibly Hegel who 
performed the most essential step toward true positivism when 
he identified the 'essence', the 'absolute', with the historical 
process and tied the fate of the absolute to that of the 
evolution of the world. Even though his detailed propositions 
cannot be accepted, his general position is closest to our 
immediate orientation. 

We completely agree with Scheler, then, that metaphysics has 
not been and cannot be eliminated from our world conception, 
and that metaphysical categories are indispensable for the inter- 
pretation of the historical and intellectual world. We also agree 
Avith him that factual knowledge and essential knowledge represent 
two different forms of knowledge, but we do not admit an abrupt 
separation of the two — what we think is rather that essential 
knowledge merely goes farther and deeper in the same direction 
in which factual knowledge sets out. It seems to us that a passage 
from factual, empirical knowledge to intuition of essences is 
taking place continually. This dualism of 'fact' and 'essence' is 
wholly parallel to that of historical science and the philosophy of 
history. There is a general tendency to make a sharp separation 
between those two disciplines; but in our opinion, the correct view 
is that a good deal of 'philosophy of history' is already embedded 
in the various concepts we use in characterizing particular facts 
— concepts which play a considerable role in determining the 
content of 'empirical' science. We are somehow guided by a 'plan', 
an 'intelligible framework' of history whenever we put the 
seemingly most isolated particular fact into a context. 

To assume such a continuity and interpenetration of these two 
types of knowledge does not mean, however, denying that they 
are different, qualitatively and hierarchically. What we object 
to is merely the 'jump' between the two worlds which tears their 
respective structures completely apart — a conception obviously 
inspired by the idea of knowledge based on revelation. 

It should not surprise us that in attempting to characterize the 



176 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

standpoint from which a sociology of knowledge can be con- 
structed, w^e had to go into such detail in discussing systematic, 
philosophical presuppositions. After all, the problem before us is 
precisely how far the empirical, scientific treatment of a problem 
is influenced by the philosophical, metaphysical standpoint of the 
investigator. 

The confirontation of the divergences betw^een our conception 
of the sociology of knowledge and that held by Scheler may have 
made it clear that both are concerned with the same task, i.e. 
the task implied by the fact that mental products can be inter- 
preted, not only directly as to their content, but also indirectly, 
in terms of their dependence on reality and especially of the social 
function they perform. This is the fact which sets us the task of 
developing a sociology of knowledge and culture. This task is 
being tackled from various philosophical standpoints, all of which 
can be assigned to a definite social position. Since Scheler's 
philosophical point of view postulates a supra-temporal, unchang- 
ing system of truths (a position which in practice always amounts 
to claiming eternal validity for one's own historically and socio- 
logically determined perspective), he is compelled to introduce the 
'contingency' of sociological factors as an afterthought into this 
immobile, supra-temporal framework. But it is impossible to 
incorporate the historical and sociological factors organically 
into one's system if this approach Trom above' is adopted. An 
unbridgeable gulf will then separate history from the supra- 
temporal. 

We proceed in the opposite direction: for us, the immediately 
given is the dynamic change of the standpoints, the historic 
element. We want to concentrate our attention upon this, and 
exploit whatever opportunity it provides for overcoming rela- 
tivism. This implies, as an initial task for the sociology of 
knowledge, that of giving as exact an account as possible of the 
intellectual standpoints co-existing at a given moment, and of 
retracing their historical development. For even the individual 
standpoints as such are not 'static', remaining changeless through- 
out; on the contrary, the relentless flux of the historic process 
brings ever new data to the surface which call for interpretation, 
and may lead to a disintegration or modification of the previously 
existing systems. Furthermore, one of the important aspects of 
the evolution of intellectual standpoints is the contribution they 
make to the overall evolutionary process within society. It is 
possible to show in retrospect in what way every single Utopia, 
and also every single image of past history, has helped to mould 
the epoch in which it emerged. There is an existentially determined 
truth content in human thought at every stage of its development; 



FROM STANDPOINT OF MODERN PHENOMENOLOGY 177 

this consists in the fact that at each moment, an attempt is made 
to increase the Vationahty' of the social-intellectual world in a 
specific way, in the direction imposed by the next evolutionary 
step. The next task of this sociology of cognition (as it should be 
called by right) consists in working out this functional role of social, 
cxistentially involved thinking at the \'arious stages of the real 
process. The metaphysical assumption that is involved here (and 
we want to emphasize that our theory does presuppose such an 
assumption) is that the global process within which the various 
intellectual standpoints emerge is a meaningful one. Standpoints 
and contents do not succeed each other in a completely haphazard 
way, since they all are parts of a meaningful overall process. The 
entire problem of 'absolute' truth will, then, coincide with that 
of the nature of this unitary meaning of the process as a whole; 
the question is how far we are able to grasp the evolutionary goal 
that can be seen at a given moment. We have already indicated 
an answer to this question: to the extent that an epoch is already 
terminated — -it can, of course, be said to be terminated only in a 
relative sense, as ^ve said — to the extent that it presents itself 
as a completed Gestalt, we can specify the functional role of thought 
patterns relative to the goal at which the evolutionary process 
had been aiming. In so far as processes just unfolding themselves 
are concerned, however, the goal is not yet given; and it cannot 
be said to exist in se or in some pre-existent fashion. In this respect, 
we are wholh' in statu nascendi and see nothing but the clash of 
antagonistic aspirations. And our own intellectual standpoint 
itself is located within one of these rival positions; hence, ^ve can 
have only a partial and perspectivic vie\v of what is unfolding 
and also of the past, in so far as the interpretation of the past 
depends on the interpretation of the ongoing process. That this 
need not lead to an illusionism, to a negation of the reality of the 
historic process, has already been stressed. We are ready to admit 
that an absolutistic doctrine in the old sense cannot be evolved 
from these premises without a 'jump' and hypostatization of one's 
own position; but then, we cannot even aim at such an absolutistic 
standpoint which, after all, is nothing but the hypostatization of 
the structural pattern of a static conception of truth. In our 
opinion, one can still believe in a static 'truth in se' only as long as 
one fails to recognize that it is not one single system which is being 
gradually built up in the historic-cultural process, as is the case 
with the system of mathematical and natural science. Within the 
historic process, thought constantly takes its departure from new 
and ever more comprehensive central ideas. The very idea of a 
'sublime dialogue' of the spirits of all ages, as Scheler conceives 
it, can occur, even as a Utopian fantasy, only to someone ^vho 
E.s.K. — 12 



178 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

believes in one system of truth. Once one has recognized that a 
'dialogue' of this kind cannot take place in this simple fashion, 
if for no other reason, because every word has a different meaning 
in different cultures, as a result of the fact that its existential 
function is a different one in each case — once one has realized 
this, he can at most conceive, as a 'utopian' belief, the idea that 
each epoch contains in itself in a 'sublimated' fashion the tensions 
of the entire historical process leading up to it. Thus, one can at 
most arrive at the belief — by extrapolating from the structural 
position observed today — that the present rivalry of antagonistic 
systems and standpoints, and their attempts at incorporating the 
rival positions within themselves, indicate an inherent tendency 
of all human thought to account for the whole of reality, a tend- 
ency which falls short of achieving its goal as long as a fully 
comprehensive systematic principle is not yet discovered. This, 
then, will be reflected in the 'finiteness', the limitation to partial 
perspectives, of actual thinking. So far as we can see, reality is 
always more comprehensive than any of the partial standpoints 
it brings forth. Then, if we extrapolate, we may believe that a 
central systematic idea will eventually be found which will in fact 
permit a synthesis of the entire process. But we cannot suppose 
this grand synthesis to be pre-existent — if for no other reason, 
because the real situation which could call forth such a synthesis 
has not yet materialized. Our 'utopia' o^ ih^ final total synthesis 
is superior to that of the one pre-existent static truth, because it 
has been derived from the actual structure of historic thought, 
whereas the latter reflects an un-historical mind, wedded to one 
static system. 

One could start from these premises, and yet overcome rela- 
tivism by a 'jump', either if he proclaimed his own standpoint 
to be the final phase of the entire dynamic (as Hegel did), or if 
he assumed that thought would no longer be existentially deter- 
mined in the future. This, however, would amount to the 're- 
stabilization' of an originally dynamic conception. Once an 
absolute stand is taken vis-a-vis history, thought becomes in fact 
static; .the point of dynamism is not to recognize that history is 
changing, but to acknowledge that one's own standpoint is no 
less dynamic than all others. For a radically dynamic conception, 
the only possible solution is, then, to recognize that one's own 
standpoint, though relative, constitutes itself in the element of 
truth. Or, to characterize the difference between Scheler's 
solution and ours by a metaphor, ^ve might say: according to our 
view, God's eye is upon the historic process (i.e. it is not meaning- 
less), whereas Scheler must imply that he looks upon the world 
with God's eyes. 



FROM THE DYNAMIC STANDPOINT 179 

A mere structural analysis of the two doctrines shows that 
neither can fully overcome the antinomies inherent in it. Scheler, 
who puts the absolute at the beginning, never reaches the 
dynamic (he cannot bridge the gulf between the static and 
dynamic); the other conception, which begins with the factual 
displacement of one standpoint by another, cannot reach the 
absolute — not, at least, in the self-assured form in which it was 
once given for a static kind of thought. But while the recognition 
of the partiality of each standpoint, and especially of his own, would 
make Scheler's theory self-contradictory, such recognition not 
only does not lead to an inner contradiction in our theory and 
sociology of knowledge, but constitutes a confirmatory instance 
for it. 

Since the overall sum of knowledge existing at a given time 
comes into being in close dependence upon the real social process, 
but this process itself approaches totality through antithesis and 
turmoil, it is not surprising that we could directly discover only 
partial intellectual currents opposed to each other and define 
a totality only as the sum of these antagonistic partial currents. 
'Where several philosophies emerge simultaneously', says Hegel, 
'we have to do with distinct aspects which together constitute the 
totality underlying all, and it is only because of their one-sidedness 
that we can see in the one only the refutation of the other. Further- 
more, they do not merely quibble about details but each puts 
forward a new principle; this is what we have to find.'^ 

In this whole discussion thus far, we have been trying to focus 
our attention upon the broad ultimate principles whose mutual 
divergences represent no 'quibbling about details' but illustrate 
the conflicting solutions of the particular problem before us that 
can be reached from the standpoints actually existing today. 
Our next task is to show how the problems of a sociology of 
knowledge can be treated from the dynamic standpoint we 
represent. 

IV. SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE FROM THE DYNAMIC STANDPOINT 

We think the present constellation is favourable to the develop- 
ment of a sociology of knowledge, because the sporadic insights 
into the social structure of knowledge gained in earlier periods 
have been multiplying rapidly in modern times, and have now 
reached a stage where a systematic rather than sporadic and 
casual treatment of these problems becomes possible. And pre- 
cisely because this 'casualness' is now being overcome more and 

1 Voriesungen iiber die Geschichte der Philosophie, ed. by I. Bolland, Leiden, 1908, 
p. 1080. 



i8o THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

more, attention is being increasingly centred upon the philo- 
sophical premises behind the findings of detail — premises that 
have not been directly explored thus far. At present, even scholars 
engaged in specialized studies are aware of this trend toward 
systematic roundedness. Scheler's essay is valuable primarily 
because it presents a comprehensive plan, an outline embracing 
various disciplines; and it has profited from the fact that the author 
is a philosopher who is at the same time a sociologist. Work in the 
field of the sociology of knowledge can be fruitful only if the 
philosophical, metaphysical premises of each author are openly 
acknowledged, and if the authors possess the ability to observe 
thought both 'from within', in terms of its logical structure, and 
'from without', in terms of its social function and conditioning. 

We shall now try to indicate the way in which a systematic 
sociology of knowledge can be developed on the basis of a dynamic 
conception. We have already outlined the basic principles of our 
approach; what remains to be done is to analyse the relevant 
methodological problems as well. 

If we adopt a dynamic conception of truth and knowledge, 
then the central problem of a sociology of knowledge will be that 
of the existentially conditioned genesis of the various standpoints 
which encompass the patterns of thought available to any given 
epoch. The entire eflfort will be concentrated upon this one point, 
because the change and the inner growth of the various stand- 
points contains for us the whole substance of the history of thought. 
The sociological analysis of thought, undertaken thus far only in a 
fragmentary and casual fashion, now becomes the object of a 
comprehensive scientific programme which permits a division of 
labour once it has been decided to go through the intellectual 
output of each period and find out on what standpoints and system- 
atic premises thought was based in each case. This, the first 
major problem of a sociology of knowledge can be tackled in 
conjunction with the work done in the field of the 'history of 
ideas', which has been extremely fruitful as regards both results 
and methods. In a number of fields (political, philosophical, 
economical, aesthetic, moral, etc.) the history of ideas shows us 
an extreme variety of changing elements of thought; but these 
labours will reach their culmination, the full realization of their 
meaning, only when we hear not only about changing contents of 
thought but also about the often merely implicit systematic 
premises on which a given idea was based in its original form — to 
be later modified so as to satisfy a different set of premises, and thus 
to survive under changed conditions. That is: the history of ideas 
can achieve its objective, that of accounting for the entire process 
of intellectual history in systematic fashion, only if it is supplemented 



FROM THE DYNAMIC STANDPOINT i8i 

by a historical structural analysis of the various centres of systematiza- 
tion that succeed each other in dynamic fashion. We do see 
beginnings of this kind of analysis (e.g. in works distinguishing 
'romanticism' or 'Enhghtenment' as different vital climates 
giving rise to different modes of thinking) ; and one would merely 
pursue these ideas to their ultimate logical consequences if one 
made a systematic effort to lay bare the ultimate axioms under- 
lying 'romantic' and 'Enlightenment' thought respectively, and 
to define the type of system to which these patterns of thought 
belong with the greatest logical and methodological precision 
possible today. This would merely mean that one would utilize for 
historical analysis the logical precision which is characteristic of 
our time. At this point already, however, we have occasion to 
point out a limitation of the history of ideas — the fact that its 
analysis proceeds in terms of 'epochs'. From a sociological point of 
view, both 'nations' and 'epochs' are much too undifferentiated 
to serve as a basis of reference in describing the historical process. 
The historian knows that a certain epoch will appear as domin- 
ated by just one intellectual current only when we have a bird's 
eye view of it. Penetrating deeper into the historical detail, we 
shall see every epoch as divided among several currents; it may 
happen, at most, that one of these currents achieves dominance 
and relegates the others to the status of under-currents. No 
current is ever completely eliminated; even while one is victorious, 
all the others that belong to one or the other social sector will 
continue to exist as under-currents, ready to re-emerge and to re- 
constitute themselves on a higher level when the time is ripe. It is 
sufficient to think of the peculiar rhythm with which 'rationalistic' 
and 'romantic' phases constantly succeeded each other during 
the most recent period in European history to realize that we are 
dealing here with separate strands of evolution which neverthe- 
less are related to each other by some higher law. However, it is 
not sufficient to recognize this evolution in separate strands; we 
also have to take into account the way in which the principal 
currents always adjust themselves to each other. Both these 
problems have to be worked out by a systematic history of ideas 
as the first chapter of a sociology of thought. For it cannot be 
overlooked, for instance, that whenever romanticism makes a 
new advance, it always takes into account the status of simultan- 
eously existing and dominant rationalist thought; not only do 
the two schools learn from each other, but they even attempt to 
work out an ever broader synthesis, in order to master the new 
situation. 

However, if we did not go any farther, we should never produce 
a sociology of knowledge. No matter how systematic it is, a purely 



i82 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

immanent analysis of the genesis of intellectual standpoints is 
still nothing but a history of ideas. This preliminary systematic 
work in the history of ideas can lead to a sociology of knowledge 
only when we examine the problem of how the various intellectual 
standpoints and 'styles of thought' are rooted in an underlying 
historico-social reality. But in this connection, too, it would be a 
mistake, in our opinion, if one were to consider reality, social 
reality, as a unitary current. If within the history of ideas it is 
too undifferentiated a procedure to take epochs as units, then it is 
an equally great error to conceive the reality behind the ideological 
process as a homogeneous unit. After all, it cannot be doubted 
that any higher type of society is composed of several different 
strata, just as intellectual life shows a variety of currents; in our 
own society, stratification can best be described as class stratifica- 
tion. And the overall dynamic of society is a resultant of all the 
partial impulses emanating from these strata. The first task, then, 
will be to find out whether there is a correlation between the 
intellectual standpoints seen in immanence and the social 
currents (social standpoints). The finding of this correlation is the 
first task specific to the sociology of knowledge. The immanent 
description of the genesis of the intellectual standpoints may still 
be considered as the continuation of the work of the historian of 
ideas; the history of social stratification may still be seen as part 
of social history. But the combination of these two fields of inquiry 
introduces a specifically sociological approach. It is, however, 
important precisely at this point to eliminate naturalism, as well 
as those attitudes which are related to the original polemical 
intention of sociology. Although the problem outlined above has 
first been formulated in terms of the Marxian philosophy of 
history, we must, in studying it, be careful to renounce all 
materialist metaphysics and to exclude (or to reduce to the element 
of truth contained in them) all propagandistic considerations. 
First of all, even the most superficial glance at the historic data 
will show that it is quite impossible to identify any given intel- 
lectual standpoint with a given stratum or class — for example as if 
the proletariat had a science of its own, developed in a closed intel- 
lectual space, and the bourgeoisie another one, neatly separated 
from it. This crude propagandistic exaggeration can lead only to 
a faulty historical oversimplification; hence, we have to suspend 
belief until we have ascertained how much truth is contained in it 
(for it does have a certain element of truth) . 

Even the immanent examination of the various intellectual 
and cognitive standpoints, as it is carried out by a systematic 
history of ideas, shows that they do not float in thin air or develop 
and ramify purely from within, but must be put in correlation with 



FROM THE DYNAMIC STANDPOINT 183 

certain tendencies embodied by social strata. At first, this 'putting 
in correlation' will present a certain difficulty for the sociologist. 
The naturalist epoch of Marxism recognized only one possible 
correlation between social reality and intellectual phenomena: 
namely, the correlation that an intellectual attitude is dictated 
by a material interest. It is because the initial phase of ideological 
research was solely motivated by 'unmasking' that being 'dictated 
by an interest' was the only form of social conditioning of ideas 
that was recognized. Not that we deny that certain intellectual 
positions can be adopted or promoted because this is useful either 
in propagating or in concealing group interests; and we admit that 
it can only be desirable to unmask such attitudes. However, this 
motivation by interest is not the only correlation that can exist 
between a social group and its intellectual positions./Socialist 
ideological research is one-sided, because it primarily concentrates 
attention upon that form of social conditioning of ideas which is 
represented by motivation by interest. 

If the category of 'interest' is recognized as the only 'existential 
relation' involving ideas, then one will be forced either to restrict 
sociological analysis to those parts of the superstructure which 
manifestly show ideological 'cloaking' of interests, o^ if it is 
nevertheless desired to analyse the entire superstructure in terms 
of its dependence upon social reality, to define the term 'interest' 
so broadly that it will lose its original meaning. In our opinion, 
neither I'oad leads to the goal. If we want to broaden ideological 
research into a sociology of knowledge, and combine it with con- 
temporary work done in the field of the history of ideas, the first 
thing to do is to overcome the one-sidedness of recognizing 
motivation by interest as the only form of social conditioning of 
ideas. This can be done most easily by a phenomenological demon- 
stration of the fact that motivation by interest is merely one of 
many possible forms in which the adoption of certain attitudes by 
a psyche can be conditioned by social experience. Thus, it may be 
that we profess a certain economic theory or certain political 
ideas because they are in keeping with our interests. But surely no 
immediate interests are involved in our choice of a certain artistic 
style or style of thought; and yet these entities also do not float in 
thin air but come to be developed by certain groups as a result 
of socio-historical factors. In the case of ideas held because of a 
direct interest, we may speak of 'interestedness'; to designate the 
more indirect relation between the subject and those other ideas, 
we may use the parallel expression 'committedness'. In fact, it is 
one of the most striking features of history that a given economic 
system is always embedded, at least as to its origin, in a given 
intellectual cosmos, so that those who seek a certain economic 



i84 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

order also seek the intellectual outlook correlated with it. When a 
group is directly interested in an economic system, then it is also 
indirectly 'committed' to the other intellectual, artistic, philo- 
sophical, etc. forms corresponding to that economic system. Thus, 
indirect 'committedness' to certain mental forms is the most com- 
prehensive category in the field of the social conditioning of ideas. 

Motivation by interest appears, then, as a partial case as 
compared to the general category of 'commitment', and it is the 
latter we have to resort to in most cases when we want to ascertain 
the relationship between 'styles of thought', 'intellectual stand- 
points' on the one hand, and social reality on the other/Whereas 
the method of 'vulgar' Marxism consists in directly associating 
even the most esoteric and spiritual products of the mind with the 
economic and power interests of a certain class, sociological 
research aiming at elucidating the total configuration of intellec- 
tual life will not emulate this crude approach; however, anxious 
to salvage the element of truth in the Marxist philosophy of 
history, it will re-examine each step postulated by this method. A 
beginning toward such revision will be made if one decides to 
use the category of motivation by interest only where interests 
actually can be seen at work, and not where mere 'commitment' 
to a Weltanschauung exists. At this point, we can draw upon our 
own sociological method which will help us recognize that this 
exclusive application of the category of interest is itself determined 
by a certain historical constellation, characterized by the pre- 
dominance of the classic economic approach. If, however, the 
category of interest is elevated to the rank of an absolute principle, 
the result can be only the reduction of the role of sociology to 
that of reconstructing the homo economicus, whereas sociology in 
fact has to examine man as a whole. Thus, we cannot assign a 
style of thought, a work of art, etc., to a group as its own on the 
basis of an analysis of interests. We can, however, show that a 
certain style of thought, an intellectual standpoint, is encompassed 
within a system of attitudes which in turn can be seen to be 
related to a certain economic and power system; we can then ask 
which social groups are 'interested' in the emergence and main- 
tenance of this economic and social system and at the same time 
'committed' to the corresponding world outlook. 

Thus, the construction of a sociology of knowledge can be 
undertaken only by taking a circuitous route through the concept 
of the total system of a world outlook (through cultural sociology). 
We cannot relate an intellectual standpoint directly to a social 
class; what we can do is find out the correlation between the 'style 
of thought' underlying a given standpoint, and the 'intellectual 
motivation' of a certain social group. 



FROM THE DYNAMIC STANDPOINT 185 

If we examine the history of knowledge and thought with 
such questions in mind, seeking to understand how it is embedded 
in the history of the real, social process, then we shall find at each 
moment not only antagonistic groups ccmbating each other, 
but also a conflict of opposed 'world postulates' {Weltwollungen) . 
In the historical process, it is not only interests that combat 
interests, but world postulates compete with world postulates. 
And this fact is sociologically relevant, because these various 
'world postulates' (of which the various 'styles of thought' are 
merely partial aspects) do not confront each other in a disem- 
bodied, arbitrary way; rather, each such postulate is linked to a 
certain group and develops within the thinking of that group. At 
each moment, it is just one stratum which is interested in main- 
taining the existing economic and social system and therefore 
clings to the corresponding style of thought; there are always 
other strata whose spiritual home is one or the other past stage of 
evolution, and yet others, just coming into being, which, being 
new, have not yet come into their own and therefore put their 
faith in the future. Since the different strata are 'interested in' and 
'committed to' different world orders and world postulates, some 
of which are things of the past while others are just emerging, it is 
obvious that value conflicts permeate each stage of historical 
evolution. 

That a 'style of thought' can be associated with the emergence 
of a certain social stratum is best demonstrated by the fact that 
modern rationalism (as was repeatedly pointed out) was linked 
to the world postulates and intellectual aspirations of the rising 
bourgeoisie, that later counter-currents allied themselves with 
irrationalism, and that a similar connection exists between 
romanticism and conservative aspirations. Starting from such 
insights, we can develop analyses of correlations between styles of 
thought and social strata — these, however, will be fruitful only if 
these attributions are not made in a static sense — e.g. by identify- 
ing rationalism with progressive and irrationalism with reaction- 
ary thought in every conceivable constellation. What we have to 
remember is that neither rationalism nor irrationalism (particu- 
larly in their present form) are eternal types of intellectual 
tendencies, and that a certain stratum is not always progressive 
or conservative respectively in the same sense. 'Conservative' and 
'progressive' are relative attributes; whether a certain stratum is 
progressive, or conservative, or, worse still, reactionary, always 
depends on the direction in which the social process itself is 
moving. As the fundamental trend of economic and intellectual 
progi'ess moves along, strata which began by being progressive 
may become conservative after they have achieved their ambition; 



i86 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

Strata which at a time played a leading role may suddenly feel 
impelled to go into opposition against the dominant trend. 

It is thus important at this point already to avoid interpreting 
such relative concepts as eternal characteristics; but we must make 
still another distinction if we want to do justice to the enormous 
variety of historical reality. That is, in establishing correlations 
between products of the mind and social strata, we must dis- 
tinguish between intellectual and social stratification. We can define 
social strata, in accordance with the Marxian concept of class, in 
terms of their role in the production process; but it is impossible, 
in our opinion, to establish a historical parallelism between 
intellectual standpoints and social strata defined in this fashion. 
Diflferentiation in the world of mind is much too great to permit 
the identification of each current, each standpoint, with a given 
class. 1 Thus, we have to introduce an intermediary concept to 
effect the correlation between the concept of 'class', defined in 
terms of roles in the production process, and that of 'intellectual 
standpoint'. This intermediary concept is that of 'intellectual 
strata'. We mean by 'intellectual stratum' a group of people 
belonging to a certain social unit and sharing a certain 'world 
postulate' (as parts of which we may mention the economic 
system, the philosophical system, the artistic style 'postulated' by 
them), 2 who at a given time are 'committed' to a certain style of 
economic activity and of theoretical thought.^ 

We must first identify the various 'world postulates', systems 
of Weltanschauung, combating each other, and find the social 
groups that champion each; only when these 'intellectual strata' 
are specified, can we ask which 'social strata' correspond to them. 
Thus, it is possible to specify the groups of people who at a given 
moment are united in a 'conservative' outlook, and share in a 
common stock of ideas which are going through a ceaseless process 
of transformation; the sociologist of culture, however, should not 
be content with approaching this subject from this doctrinal point 
of view, but he should also ask himself which 'social classes' make 
up such an 'intellectual stratum'. We can understand the trans- 
formation of the various ideologies only on the basis of changes in 
the social composition of the intellectual stratum corresponding 
to them. The same applies obviously to the progressive types of 
Weltanschauung. The proletariat (to show the reverse side of the 

1 In Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, Max Weber made an attempt to give a full 
account of the great variety of social stratification. 

2 This 'postulation' is no reflectively conscious 'willing' but an unconscious, 
latent trend, analogous to A. Riegl's 'art motive' {Kunstwollen). 

3 In a purely economic context, W. Sombart defines 'social class' in an 
analogous fashion; cf. Soziatismiis und So^iale Bewegung, 8th edition, p. i. 



FROM THE DYNAMIC STANDPOINT 187 

correlation we are dealing with) constitutes one class; but this one 
social class is divided as to the 'world postulates' of its members, 
as is clearly shown by the proletariat's following a number of 
different political parties. The only point of interest for the soci- 
ologist is this: what types of progressive world postulates exist at 
a given moment, what are the progressive intellectual strata 
adhering to them, and what social strata within the proletariat 
belong to these various intellectual strata? 

The peculiar function of this intermediary concept, that of 
'intellectual stratum', consists in making a co-ordination of 
intellectual configurations with social groups possible without 
blurring the inner differentiation either of the world of mind or 
of social reality. Further, we have to take the fact into account 
that at no moment in history does a social stratum produce its 
ideas, so to speak, out of thin air, as a matter of pure invention. 
Both conservative and progressive groups of various kinds inherit 
ideologies which somehow have existed in the past. Conservative 
groups fall back upon attitudes, methods of thought, ideas of 
remote epochs and adapt them to new situations; but newly 
emerging groups also take up at first already existing ideas and 
methods, so that a cross-section through the rival ideologies 
combating one another at a given moment also represents a 
cross-section through the historical past of the society in question. 
If, however, we focus our attention exclusively upon this 'in- 
heritance' aspect of the story, and try to reduce to it the entire 
relationship between social reality and the intellectual process, 
we obtain an entirely wrong kind of historicism. If we look at the 
process of intellectual evolution and the role of social strata in it 
solely from this point of view, then it will seem, in fact, as if 
nothing happened except the unfolding of potentialities given in 
advance. It is, however, merely a peculiarity of the conservative 
conception of historicism that the continuous nature of all 
historical processes is interpreted as implying that everything has 
its origin in something temporally preceding it. The progressive 
\'ariant of historicism looks at the process of evolution from the 
angle of the status nascendi. 

This perspective alone enables us to see that even motifs and 
aspects simply taken over from a predecessor always become 
something different owing to this very passage itself, merely because 
their sponsor is a different one, and relates them to a different 
situation. Or, to put it more succinctly: change of function of an 
idea always involves a change of meaning — this being one of the 
most essential arguments in favour of the proposition that history 
is a creative medium of meanings and not merely the passive 
medium in which pre-existent, self-contained meanings find their 



i88 THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

realization. Thus, we have to add to our list of categories this 
central concept of all sociology of culture and thought, that of 
'change of function'; for without this, we could produce nothing 
but a mere history of ideas. 

We shall, however, distinguish two types of change of function; 
an immanent and a sociological. We speak of an immanent change 
of function (in the realm of thought, to mention only one of the 
fields in which this phenomenon may occur), when a concept 
passes from one system of ideas into another. Terms like 'ego', 
'money', 'romanticism', etc. mean something different, according 
to the system within which they are used. By a sociological change 
of function, however, we mean a change in the meaning of a 
concept which occurs when that concept is adopted by a group 
living in a different social environment, so that the vital signifi- 
cance of the concept becomes different. Each idea acquires a new 
meaning when it is applied to a new life situation. When new 
strata take over systems of ideas from other strata, it can always 
be shown that the same words mean something different to the 
new sponsors, because these latter think in terms of different 
aspirations and existential configurations. This social change of 
function, then, is, as stated above, also a change of meaning. And 
although it is true that different social strata cultivating the same 
cultural field share the same 'germinal' ideas (this being the 
reason why understanding is possible from one stratum to the 
other), developing social reality introduces something incalculable, 
creatively new into the intellectual process, because the un- 
predictable new situations emerging within reality constitute new 
existential bases of reference for familiar ideas. Social strata play 
a creative role precisely because they introduce new intentions, 
new directions of intentionality, new world postulates, into the 
already developed framework of ideas of older strata which then 
appropriate them, and thus subject their heritage to a productive 
change of function. 

Different social strata, then, do not 'produce different systems 
of ideas' [Weltanschanungen) in a crude, materialistic sense — in the 
sense in which lying ideologies can be 'manufactured' — they 
'produce' them, rather, in the sense that social groups emerging 
within the social process are always in a position to project new 
directions of that 'intentionality', that vital tension, which 
accompanies all life. The reason why it is so important in studying 
'immanent' changes of function of a given idea (the passage of a 
unit of meaning into a new system), also to observe the tensions 
and vital aspirations operative behind theoretical thought, and 
introducing antagonisms into the life of the society as a whole — 
the reason why it is so important to study these real tensions is that 



FROM THE DYNAMIC STANDPOINT 189 

it is extremely likely that an immanent change of function is 
preceded by a sociological one, i.e. that shifts in social reality are 
the underlying cause of shifts in theoretical systems. 

If the task of a sociology of knowledge is approached with these 
premises in mind, it will present itself in the following form: 
the main task consists in specifying, for each temporal cross- 
section of the historical process, the various systematic intellectual 
standpoints on which the thinking of creative individuals and 
groups was based. Once this is done, however, these different 
trends of thought should not be confronted like positions in a 
mere theoretical debate, but we should explore their non- 
theoretical, vital roots. To do this, we first have to uncover the 
hidden metaphysical premises of the various systematic positions; 
then we must ask further which of the 'world postulates' co- 
existing in a given epoch are the correlates of a given style of 
thought. When these correspondences are established, we already 
have identified the intellectual strata combating each other. The 
sociological task proper, however, begins only after this 'imman- 
ent' analysis is done — it consists in finding the social strata making 
up the intellectual strata in question. It is only in terms of the 
role of these latter strata within the overall process, in terms of 
their attitudes toward the emerging new reality, that we can 
define the fundamental aspirations and world postulates existing 
at a given time which can absorb already existing ideas and 
methods and subject them to a change of function — not to speak 
of newly created forms. Such changes of function are in no way 
mysterious; it is possible to determine them with sufficient 
exactness by combining sociological methods with those of the 
history of ideas. We can, for instance, go back to the historical 
and sociological origin of an idea and then, following its evolution, 
determine, so to speak, the 'angle of refraction' each time it 
undergoes a change of function, by specifying the new systematic 
centre to which the idea becomes linked, and simultaneously 
asking what existential changes in the real background are 
mirrored by that change of meaning. 

As a rather familiar example, we may mention the change of 
function of the dialectical method — the leitmotiv of the present 
discussion. Dialectics was clearly formulated for the first time by 
Hegel within the framework of a conservative world postulate (we 
shall not discuss the earlier history of the method). When Marx 
took it over, it became modified in various respects. We want to 
mention only two of these revisions. Firstly, dialectics was 'made 
to stand on its feet rather than on its head', i.e. it was lifted from its 
idealistic context and re-interpreted in terms of social reality. 
Secondly, the final term of historical dynamics became the future 



igo THE PROBLEM OF A SOCIOLOGY OF KNOWLEDGE 

rather than the present. Both shifts, which represent a change of 
meaning in the method, may be explained by the 'change of 
function' brought about under the impact of the vital aspirations 
of the proletariat which Marx made his own. We can explain the 
new features of the system by recalling that the life of the prole- 
tariat revolves around economic problems, and that its vital 
tension is directed toward the future. On the other hand, HegeFs 
system also may be shown to be sociologically determined. The 
fact that in this system the closing phase of the dynamism of history 
is the present mirrors the success achieved by a class which, having 
come into its own, merely wants to conserve what has already 
been accomplished. 

If, then, we define the sociology of knowledge as a discipline 
which explores the functional dependence of each intellectual 
standpoint on the differentiated social group reality standing 
behind it, and which sets itself the task of retracing the evolution 
of the various standpoints, then it seems that the fruitful begin- 
nings made by historicism may point in a direction in which 
further progress is possible. Having indicated the systematic 
premises characterizing historicism as a point of departure for a 
sociology of knowledge, we then went on to suggest a few methodo- 
logical problems involved in this approach. At the same time, 
however, we also wanted to show the method in operation, and 
hence we described the principal 'standpoints' from which the 
elaboration of a sociology of knowledge may be undertaken in 
the present constellation. We thought that such an analysis of the 
present status of the problem in terms of the categories of the 
sociology of knowledge would contribute to give this discipline a 
clearer notion of itself 



CHAPTER V 

COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL 
PHENOMENON 



THIS paper is meant as a contribution to two closely con- 
nected problems. Firstly, the intention is to illustrate further 
the problem of competition, and secondly to make a contri- 
bution to a sociological theory of the mind. 

As regards competition, I hope that my paper will serv^e as a 
supplement to that of the previous speaker, Professor Leopold von 
Wiese, ^ who gave a systematic discussion of competition as such from 
the viewpoint of formal sociology. I, on the other hand, propose 
to discuss the problem from the angle of applied historkal sociology. 

I am glad to say I am in complete agreement with Professor von 
Wiese's talk in so far as it touched upon my subject, and I shall 
simply build upon his conclusions without further discussion. 

Thus, I shall simply submit without discussion the correctness 
of his main contention that competition must be regarded as a 
feature not merely of economic life, but of social life as a whole, 
and I propose to outline its role as a determinant in intellectual 
life, where its importance has so far been least recognized. 

What is meant by saying that competition acts as a 'determin- 
ant' in intellectual life? The term is meant to suggest that competi- 
tion does not operate merely at the margin, as a stimulus, an 
inducement, a sporadic cause of intellectual production (which in 
any case w^ould be admitted by everyone), but that it enters as a 
constituent element into the form and content of every cultural 
product or movement. 

This recognition of the role of competition as a determinant in 
intellectual life is not meant, however, as a declaration of faith 
in unbridled 'sociologism'. I am far from suggesting that it is 
possible merely on the basis of a sociological account of the 

^ Lecture delivered at theSixth Congress of German Sociologists, Zurich, 
17-19 September, 1928. 

191 



192 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

genesis of a mental pattern or product to draw direct conclusions 
concerning its truth or validity. 

There are two extreme points of view regarding the role of 
competition in intellectual life. There are those who refuse to 
ascribe more than a peripheral role to it, over against those who 
see in cultural creations nothing but a by-product of the social 
process of competition. My own position is somewhere in the 
middle between these two extremes. To give a more exact idea 
of my position with regard to these extreme views: while the first 
school of thought considers the role of competition in intellectual 
life as peripheral, and the second as determinant, in my own view, 
it is co-determinant. 

I do not propose, however, to pursue this train of thought any 
farther, although the epistemological problems just alluded to are 
certainly germane to my subject. For reasons of economy and to 
keep the discussion at a factual level, I would suggest disregarding 
all questions of epistemological validity for the time being. I shall 
make a few remarks about these things at the end of my talk, but 
I would ask you to pay attention in the first place to what I have 
to say about the purely sociological aspects of my subject. 

My assertion that the form which competition among intel- 
lectually creative subjects assumes at a given time is a co-determin- 
ant of the visible cultural pattern is closely connected with a more 
sweeping conviction many of you share, namely, that not only 
competition, but also all other social relations and processes 
comprising the prevailing pattern of social life are determinants 
of the mental life corresponding to that particular social structure. 
To use a somewhat bold shorthand formula: we recognize here 
the problem o{ sociology of the mind, as one capable of unambiguous 
formulation and of detailed empirical examination. 

Whereas the generation which lived through the French 
Revolution and went through the corresponding process of 
reflection had as its task the development of a 'phenomenology of 
the spirit' and of a philosophy of history showing, for the first 
time, the dynamics and the morphology of the mind and the role 
of the historical moment as a co-determinant of the content of 
intellectual products, it seems to me to be at least one of the 
primary tasks devolving upon our generation, owing to the historical 
circumstances of our time, to promote understanding for the role 
of the life of the social body as a determinant of mental 
phenomena. 

Certain problems of hoary antiquity assume a surprising 
meaning if seen in this new context. Thus problems such as those 
which Wegelin had already pondered — what intellectual currents 
really are, what factors determine their inner rhythm — for the 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 193 

first time become to a large degree amenable to a solution if 
viewed from this angle. 

I think a consistent application of the method of sociological 
analysis to mental life will show that many phenomena originally 
diagnosed as manifestations of immanent laws of the mind may 
be explained in terms of the prevailing structural pattern of 
determination within society. It seems to me, then, that I am not 
following a false trail if I assume that the so-called 'dialectical' 
(as distinct from the unilinear, continuous) form of evolution and 
change in mental life can be largely traced back to two very 
simple structural determinants of social character: to the existence 
of generations, 1 and to the existence of the phenomenon of 
competition with which it is our task to deal here. 

So much for introduction, as a preliminary survey of the 
subject. After this more general discussion, however, I hope you 
will bear with me if I go on to examine only a rather narrowly 
circumscribed segment of the field to which my subject belongs. 
In the interests of concreteness, I shall now formulate my problem 
in more specialized terms. First I shall make a few preparatory 
remarks. 

To begin with, I should like to delimit, examine, and describe, 
somewhat in the manner of a physician, the area of demonstration, 
the field in which competition is to be shown to operate. 

I do not propose to determine the role competition plays in 
mental life as a whole, but only in the realm of thought, and even 
here, I shall not be concerned with all thought, but only with a 
special kind of thought — not that of the exact natural sciences, 
but only a particular kind of thought which I would like to call 
existentially-determined. Within this concept of existentially-deter- 
mined thought are included historical thought (the way in which 
man interprets history, and the way in which he presents it to 
others), political thought, thought in the cultural and social 
sciences, and also ordinary everyday thought. 

The simplest way to describe this type of thought is to contrast 
it with thought as it appears in the exact natural sciences. There 
are the following diflferences; 

{a) in the case of existentially-determined thought, the results 
of the thought process are partly determined by the nature of the 
thinking subject; 

[b) in the natural sciences, thinking is carried on, in idea at 

1 Cf. 'Das Problem der Generationen' (this volume, pp. 276 ff.). This paper is 
closely related to the present one — both are contributions to a sociology of 
the mind. 

E.S.K. — 13 



194 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

least, by an abstract 'consciousness as such' in us, whereas in 
existentially-determined thought, it is— to use Dilthey's phrase — 
'the whole man' who is thinking. 

What does this mean more exactly? The difference can be shown 
very clearly with a simple example. In the thought '2+2=4' 
there is no indication as to who did the thinking, and where. 
On the other hand, it is possible to tell in the case of existentially- 
determined thought, not only from its content, but also from its 
logical form and the categoreal apparatus involved, whether the 
thinker has approached historical and social reality from the point 
of view of the 'historical school', of 'Western positivism', or of 
Marxism. 

Here arises an important point. We shall see in this a defect 
of existentially-determined thinking only if we adopt a method- 
ology based upon the exact natural sciences as a model. I would 
urge, as against this, that each type of thinking should be under- 
stood in terms of its own innermost nature. That certain items of 
knowledge are incapable of an absolute interpretation and 
formulation does not mean that they are abitrary and subjective, 
but only that they are a function of a particular viewpoint or 
perspective; that is to say, that certain qualitative features of an object 
encountered in the living process of history are accessible only to minds of a 
certain structure. There are certain qualitatively distinguished 
features of historically existing objects that are open to perception 
only by a consciousness as formed and devised by particular 
historical circumstances. This idea of the 'existential relativity' of 
certain items of knowledge — which the phenomenological school, 
along with a few others, is now developing with increasing clarity 
— is far from implying a relativism under which everybody and 
nobody is right; what it implies is rather a relationism which says 
that certain (qualitative) truths cannot even be grasped, or 
formulated, except in the framework of an existential correlation 
between subject and object. This means, in our context, that 
certain insights concerning some qualitative aspect of the living 
process of history are available to consciousness only as formed 
by certain historical and social circumstances, so that the 
historico-social formation of the thinking and knowing subject 
assumes epistemological importance. 

So much for existentially-determined thought: our area of 
demonstration at present. Now for the problem: what are we 
maintaining as our thesis? Firstly, that in thought (from now on, 
this term always means existentially-determined thought) com- 
petition can be shown to operate; and, secondly, that it can be 
shown to be a co-determinant in the process of its formation. The 
first question which confronts us as we try to develop these theses 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 195 

is the following: does the process of thinking, of struggling for 
truth, involve at all a competition? 

We can be certain that our formulation of the problem will 
expose us to the criticism that we are projecting specifically 
economic categories into the mental sphere, and our first task 
must be to meet this criticism. This reproach, however plausible 
it may seem at first sight, and happily as it meets the view of 
those who like to see in the kingdom of the mind the unchallenged 
domain of absolute unconditional creation, must be rejected as 
beside the point. Actually, it seems to me that the reverse is the 
case. Nothing is being generalized from the economic sphere: 
on the contrary, when the Physiocrats and Adam Smith demon- 
strated the important role of competition in economic life, they 
were in fact only discovering a general social relationship in the 
particular context of the economic system. The 'general social' — 
meaning the interplay of vital forces between the individuals of a 
group — became visible at first in the economic sphere, and if we 
deliberately adopt the course of employing economic categories 
in the formulation of social interrelationships in the mental sphere, 
this is because until now the existence of the social was most 
easily discerned in its economic manifestations. The ultimate aim, 
however, must be to strip our categorial apparatus of anything 
specifically economic in order to grasp the social fact sui generis. 

To accept the proposition that the phenomenon of competition 
is also to be found in the mental sphere, does not imply that 
theoretical conflict is nothing but the reflection of current social 
competition, but simply that theoretical conflict also is a mani- 
festation of the 'general social'. 

Phenomenologically speaking, theoretical conflict is a self- 
contained sphere, as is also social conflict in the more general 
sense. It is not enough, however, always to keep things apart and 
to keep watch over the jurisdictions of the various spheres. We 
must explore the interpenetration, the togetherness of these 
'planes of experience', the separation of which is merely a matter 
of phenomenality and often does not go beyond the immediate 
datum. Once this is seen, the question becomes: how is theoretical 
conflict related to social conflict? 

The correctness of our thesis that competition does operate in 
mental life — that is, in existentially-determined thinking — can 
perhaps be shown in the easiest way by demonstrating some of the 
generally typical features of competition as such in intellectual 
life. 

In the first place, it is clear that in the case of historical thought, 
as in that of all existentially-determined thought, we are faced 
with rivalry between different parties seeking an identical goal, and 



igG COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

also with what von Wiese has called 'a discrepancy of the lowest 
degree'. 1 Other general characteristics of competition can also 
be shown to be present in existentially-determined thinking, the 
tendency either to degenerate into conflict, to turn into fight, or to 
change into a relationship of association. It would not be difficult 
to demonstrate in existentially-determined thought also the two 
types of competition defined by Oppenheimer^ — hostile contest 
and peaceful rivalry. Finally, as regards the social agents of 
competition, individuals, groups, and abstract collectives can all 
take over this function, and it could be shown how far thought, 
and the principle of competition operative within it, assume 
different forms according to whether the competing parties are 
groups or individuals. The American writer Ross^ has put forward 
some very useful observations on this point, in particular as to 
competition between institutions. 

It is thus clear that the characteristics of the general socio- 
logical phenomenon of competition are also to be met with in 
existentially-determined thought. There is only one difficulty — 
how can we show that, in existentially-determined thinking, the 
various parties seek identical goals? What is the appropriate 
formulation of competition in the sphere of thought? How can we 
define existentially-determined thought in such a way that the 
sociological factor of competition comes to the fore? Further, 
what can we take to be the identical goal sought by competitors in 
the sphere of existentially-determined thought? 

It appears that the different parties are all competing for the 
possession of the correct social diagnosis {Sicht), or at least for 
the prestige which goes with the possession of this correct diagnosis. 
Or, to use a more pregnant term to characterize this identical 
goal : the competing parties are always struggling to influence what 
the phenomenologist Heidegger^ calls the 'public interpretation 
of reality'. I do not suggest, of course, that Heidegger, as a philo- 
sopher, would agree with the sociological theory I am pro- 
pounding. 

Philosophy, ladies and gentlemen, may look at this matter 
differently; but from the point of view of the social sciences, every 
historical, ideological, sociological piece of knowledge (even 
should it prove to be Absolute Truth itself), is clearly rooted in 
and carried by the desire for power and recognition of particular 

1 Cf. Beziehungslehre. 

2 Oppenheimer, F., System der Soziologie, Jena, 1922-27. Vol. I, pp. XIV, 
348, 370. 

3 E. A. Ross, Foundations of Sociology, New York, 1905, pp. 285 fF. 

^ M. Heidegger, 'Sein und Zeit', Jahrbuch fUr Philosophie und phdnomeno- 
logische Forschung, Halle a.d.S., 1927. Vol, VIII. 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 197 

social gi'oups who want to make their interpretation of the world 
the universal one. 

To this, sociology and the cultural sciences make no exception; 
for in them we see only the old battle for universal acceptance of a 
particular interpretation of reality, carried on with modern 
scientific weapons. One may accept or reject the thesis that all 
pre-sociological interpretations of reality were based on gratuitous 
belief or superstition, and that our concept of reality is the only 
scientific and correct one. But even those who accept this thesis 
unconditionally must admit that the process in the course of which 
scientific interpretations gain ascendancy in a society has the 
same structure as the process in the course of which pre-scientific 
modes of interpretation had achieved dominance; that is to say, 
even the 'correct', 'scientific', interpretation did not arise out of a 
pure, contemplative desire for knowledge, but fulfilled the age-old 
function of helping some group find its way about in the surround- 
ing world. It emerged and exists in exactly the same way as the 
pre-scientific modes of orientation — that is, as a function of the 
interplay of vital forces. 

The nature of the generally accepted interpretation of the 
world at any given time is of decisive importance in determining 
the particular nature of the stage of historical evolution reached 
at that time. This is not merely a matter of the so-called 'public 
opinion' which is commonly recognized as a superficial phenom- 
enon of collective psychology, but of the inventory of our set 
of fundamental meanings in terms of which we experience the 
outside world as well as our own inner responses. 

Man, when he lives in the world rather than in complete 
aloofness — and we will not discuss here whether any such com- 
plete aloofness, involving complete indiflference toward the 
prevailing interpretation of reality, is at all conceivable — does not 
exist in a world in general, but in a world of meanings, interpreted 
in a particular way. 

The philosopher Heidegger calls this collective subject who 
supplies us with the prevailing public interpretation of reality 
'das Man — the 'They'. This is the 'They' that is meant in the 
French expressions — such as Que dit-on, or Que dira-t-on — but it is 
not merely the collective subject responsible for gossip and tittle- 
tattle, but also that profounder Something which always interprets 
the world somehow, whether in its superficiality or its depths, and 
which causes us always to meet the world in a preconceived form. 
We step at birth into a ready-interpreted world, a world which 
has already been made understandable, every part of which has 
been given meaning, so that no gaps are left. What Life means, 
what Birth and Death mean, and what one's attitude toward 



igS COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

certain feelings and thoughts should be — all that is already more 
or less definitely laid down for us: something — this 'They' — has 
gone before us, apparently determined that nothing should be left 
for us to do in this respect. 

The philosopher looks at this 'They', this secretive Something, 
but he is not interested to find out how it arose; and it is just at 
this point, where the philosopher stops, that the work of the 
sociologist begins. 

Sociological analysis shows that this public interpretation of 
reality is not simply 'there'; nor, on the other hand, is it the result 
of a 'systematic thinking out'; it is the stake for which men fight. 
And the struggle is not guided by motives of pure contemplative 
thirst for knowledge. Different interpretations of the world for 
the most part correspond to the particular positions the various 
groups occupy in their struggle for power. In answering the 
question how this 'They', this publicly prevailing interpretation 
of reality actually comes into being, I would mention four kinds 
of social process as generating factors. 

The public interpretation of reality can come about: 

(i) on the basis of a consensus of opinion, of spontaneous co- 
operation between individuals and groups; 

(2) on the basis of the monopoly-position of one particular group; 

(3) on the basis of competition between many gi'oups, each 
determined to impose on others their particular interpretation 
of the world. (We shall call this case 'atomistic competition^ although 
we must add that a point is never reached where atomization is 
complete, so that individuals compete with individuals, and com- 
pletely independent thinking groups with others equally isolated) ; 

(4) on the basis of a concentration round one point of view of a 
number of formerly atomistically competing groups, as a result of 
which competition as a whole is gradually concentrated around a 
few poles which become more and more dominant. 

As you see, public interpretations of reality, just like any other 
objective cultural product, come into being through the inter- 
mediary of social relationships and processes. 

Our next task is to give concrete examples illustrating these 
four typical cases, and at the same time to show that the socially 
determined genesis of any conception of the world so profoundly 
influences its inner structure that, once our sociology of knowledge 
has completed its systematic analysis of these correlations, any 
expert will be able to indicate, on the basis of a simple inspection 
of any given world conception or thought pattern, whether it has 
come into being, as a result of atomistic competition between 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 199 

individual groups, on the basis of a consensus, or of a monopoly 
of a dominating group. 

One further preliminary remark is necessary. The four types 
mentioned are pure types. In actual societies in every age, provided 
they have reached a minimum degree of development, several 
pure types will be found to co-exist and to blend together; one 
type, however, will tend to predominate. This will be the 'domin- 
ant pattern of interpretation' of the society in question. 

Let us take up the four types of thinking one by one. 

The first type — based on consensus — is to be found in its pure 
form in socially homogeneous strata or societies, where the range 
and basis of experience is uniform, and where the fundamental 
incentives or impulses to thought tend to be the same for all 
individuals. 

The main prerequisite for the emergence of this mode of 
thought is that social relationships should be static. This makes it 
possible for schemes of experience once laid down and confirmed 
to be used again and again; the traditional wisdom is ahvays 
appropriate to the environment, and any small adjustments in 
the inherited modes of experience \vhich may be necessary even 
in such a static environment, are easily accomplished without ever 
having to be made conscious and reflective. 

A further prerequisite is that there shall prevail genuine 
intellectual democracy of the kind characteristic of primitive, 
archaic societies, where everyone is able to grasp the wisdom 
handed down by tradition and to adapt it to changed conditions: 
every individual carries the same traditional dispositions for per- 
ception. The external characteristics of such a type of knowledge 
are exemplified by myths, proverbs, and other samples of tradi- 
tional folk wisdom. One is struck primarily by their undialectical 
character. The 'it' in us observes and rules the world. 'It is so\ say 
the proverbs (at least this is the implication of the way in which 
they address us); they are the reflection and expression of an 
unambiguous, undialectical experience of life. 'It shall be so\ is 
the straight message contained in the prescriptions of traditionally 
sanctional usages and customs. 

This type of thought never really dies out, and it exists even 
today in our own society in strata which have succeeded com- 
pletely or in part in keeping themselves aloof from the overpower- 
ing dynamic of the modern era. But — and this is still more 
important — even in our own consciousness, already made 
thoroughly dynamic, there exist forms of thought and experience 
which are adequate in responding to certain elements of our 
cultural environment which have not yet been drawn into the 
dynamic of the modern era, and are not affected by it. 



200 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

Common sense, which formulates the principles of our dealings 
with the simplest things, possesses this 'it' character. The majority 
of proverbs are of this type; they should be included in the con- 
sensus type of thought, even if it turned out that the theory of 
'cultural sedimentation' (as put forward, for example, by H. 
Naumanni) would apply to many of them. This theory maintains 
that proverbs, with the greater part of the rest of folk-culture, are 
the 'sediments' of a culture shaped by past ruling strata, and that 
the 'people' as such have only taken over and transformed these 
cultural creations after a certain time-lag. Whether this is true of 
any individual proverb or not, and whether proverbs in general 
travel in an upward or downward direction, they appeal in any 
case to just one mechanism of our consciousness. Our theory by 
no means ignores the mental attitude corresponding to this 
mechanism which we may term 'the primitive community spirit'. 
The form of the proverb, no matter where its contents come from, 
corresponds to the consensus principle of formulating experience 
which in my view still dominates popular consciousness almost 
completely, while the consciousness of higher and more intel- 
lectualized strata is only partly under its sway. 

Since the child's world is made up entirely of the very simple 
relationships which underlie proverbs, we may say that the 
consciousness of the human individual initially acquires this type 
of 'it' structure; and it reverts to this 'it' structure even at a later 
stage of its development, whenever it becomes confronted with 
such archaic relationships. To be sure, we often have the impres- 
sion that the ever-advancing dynamism of our age engulfs the 
totality of our vital relationships (and hence also the totality of 
our mental life); but this is not altogether true, and a closer 
examination shows that it is at least not true to the extent assumed. 
Despite all dynamic, even for the urban type (who is most exposed 
to dynamic influences) there remains untouched a substantial 
layer of these primitive relationships, with their corresponding 
primitive attitude patterns. The truth of a common-sense state- 
ment such as, for example, that when two people fight, a third 
will reap the advantage, remains as unchangeable in the face of 
all dynamic as are, for example, the emotional patterns of mystery 
and of primeval fears which hardly change in the course of dynamic 
development. Our feeling of security, however, is based precisely 
upon this relatively constant layer of our experience; the dynamic 
movement and instability of our relationships in general would 
have unbalanced us long ago but for the relative stability of these 
original, primitive relationships. The difficulties of complicated 

1 H. Naumann, Grundzuge der deutschen Volkskunde. Leipzig, 1922; pp. i fF., 
137 ff. 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 201 

relationships can be tolerated so long as primitive relationships 
manifest a certain security and stability, or at least so long as 
they create the illusion of such a security and stability. 

The second type presents that sort of thought which is based 
on the monopoly position of one group (generally a closed status 
group). The medieval-ecclesiastical interpretation of the world 
and the tradition cultivated by Chinese literati belong here. 

A monopoly position of this type may be secured by purely 
intellectual means, or by non-intellectual instruments of power: 
in general, however, both are being employed. In the Middle 
Ages, the monopoly of the clergy rested on a very simple basis: 
in the first place, only they could read and write; secondly, Latin 
was the language of education; and thirdly, only masters of both 
these accomplishments were in a position to have access to the 
source of Truth — the Bible and tradition. 

This type of thought has certain external features in common 
with the consensus type. Both have the same prerequisite for their 
existence — viz. a structurally stable social body, by which is not 
meant that nothing ever happens in such a society, but merely 
that the basis of all thought is homogeneous, and that the range 
of sensitivity is strictly delimited. 

By 'range of sensitivity' I mean the extent and contents of that 
area of experience in which intuitive acts preceding all knowledge 
and providing conceptual material for it occur automatically, 
reliably, and on the whole, in such a way that every individual is 
capable of performing every intuitive act within the range. Thus, 
a hunting or a peasant community, for instance, has such a de- 
limited range of sensitivity with regard to natural objects; or a 
craft guild, with regard to instruments and artificial objects; a 
particular community with regard to certain inner experiences 
leading to ecstasy. The difference between the uniformity of a 
community of experience based on a monopoly situation and one 
based on a consensus, seems to lie in the fact that the former 
preserves its uniform character by artificial means, while the latter 
is able to maintain its uniformity, homogeneity, and inner stability 
by virtue of socially-rooted factors of an organic kind. 

The basis of thought in a monopoly situation is externally given, 
i.e. laid down in sacred works. Thought is largely directed toward 
the interpretation of texts rather than toward the interpretation 
of reality. If it does concern itself with this latter task, the results 
are likely to be assimilated to textual interpretation. The essence 
of thought here is that every new fact as it arises has to be fitted 
into a given, pre-existent ordo\ this is achieved, for the most part, 
by interpreting or re-interpreting the Tacts'. 

Thus it is easy to recognize the theological and interpretive 



202 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

character of this kind of thought. The best example of such an 
ordo is perhaps the Summa of Thomas Aquinas. 

The way in which the thinking of St. Thomas embraces the 
whole of the ordo is gi'andiose. What strikes us first in his system is 
its seemingly dialectical method. The way in which theses are 
confronted with counter-theses is at least reminiscent of dialectic. 
Nevertheless, this does not seem to be a genuine dialectic in the 
sense that the different theses represent antagonistic social factors 
locked in real struggle; on the contrary, it seems that the apparent 
controversies merely serve to eliminate those inconsistencies that 
may still have remained from the previous stage of competition, 
when there were numerous groups competing to impose their 
interpretation of the world, and the monopoly position of the view 
which later achieved predominance had not yet been established. 

In judging these matters, there is an important point which 
must not be disregarded. Uniformity of the basis of thought and 
experience does not imply the absence of strife and controversy. 
On the contrary, in the Middle Ages people were always engaged 
in the most violent controversies — only with the qualification 
that controversy had to be kept within certain previously estab- 
lished limits. Certain religious claims are left unchallenged, and a 
certain method of formulation and statement is to a large extent 
codified. It must always be remembered how much, in spite of all 
conflict, is silently taken for gi^anted. 

Both types of thought just described (based on consensus and 
on a monopoly position respectively) co-exist in the Middle Ages. 
Both can develop side by side, because, as we said before, the 
common prerequisite, structural stability of the social body, is 
given. As long as society remains static, these two types of thought 
divide the mental field among themselves. 

Even at this stage, however, we encounter certain complications 
which have a decisive importance for later developments. The 
prevailing interpretation of the world already assumes a dual 
character. We distinguish, on the one hand, an official, academic 
{bildungsmaessig) interpretation, and, on the other, an everyday, 
consensus-like one. This duality in its turn manifests itself in two 
ways. One of its symptoms is a social differentiation. There are 
groups the main activity of which consists in the official, academic 
interpretation of the world; others do not go beyond the spon- 
taneous, consensus-like interpretation customary in their milieu. 
And the same duality can also be shown to exist in the conscious- 
ness of individuals. The individual lives potentially on either plane 
— he responds to his situation at one moment in academic terms, 
and at another in the spontaneous traditional ways built up in the 
life of his particular social stratum. We may mention, for instance, 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 203 

the specifically 'aristocratic' and urban 'guild' mentalities, which 
in the Middle Ages existed side by side with the ecclesiastical 
interpretation of the world. 

Later developments, however, hinged precisely around the 
transformation of the reciprocal relationships of these two ways 
of thinking (the monopolistic, ecclesiastical, and the consensus- 
like non-institutionalized one). The ecclesiastical official inter- 
pretation was unable to maintain its monopoly position; it was 
shattered by the tensions prevailing in an increasingly dynamic 
society. At the moment of the catastrophe, however, successors 
appeared from two sides: firstly, there was the new e7/fe of Human- 
ists, which claimed the monopoly of the academic interpretation of 
reality; the interpretation was to be given in secularized terms, but 
the full distance between the educated and uneducated was to be 
maintained. Secondly, however, an ideology representing the 
unschooled wisdom of the common people, a consensus-like 
democracy of thinking, also appeared on the scene, and made a 
bid to supersede the official interpretation of reality. 

Continually changing interrelationships of various intellectual 
elites, opposed by the aspirations of the spokesmen of the common 
people, are the principal feature of the following epoch, in which 
thought has the basic structure of the next type to be discussed. 

This third type is that corresponding to atomistic cojnpetition. 
As has been already mentioned, this type of thinking is represen- 
tative of the period following the breakdown of the ecclesiastical 
monopoly, and is characterized by the fact that many isolated 
concrete social groups bid fair to take over the inheritance of the 
official interpretation of the world. An absolute monopoly in the 
sense that all opposition was disposed of had never been achieved 
by the Church, even at the height of her power. For instance, there 
always were opponents within the Church who had to be kept 
under control. In their case, we may speak of an encysted 
{eingekapselt) opposition; one could mention, as examples, 
opposition groups within the Church such as the mystics, the 
Franciscans, and so on. 

How even at this stage different lines of thought were correlated 
with differences between the competing social groups behind 
them is shown in Honigsheim's observation^ that the adherents 
of the two philosophical schools. Realism and Nominalism, were 
recruited among members of different, well-circumscribed social 

1 P. Honigsheim, ^ur Soziologie der mittelalterlichen Scholastik. Die soziologische 
Bedeulung der nominalistischen Philosophie. In the Erinnerungsgabe for Max Weber, 
Munich-Leipzig, 1923. Vol. II, pp. 175 ff^. Cf. also the various essays by Honigs- 
heim, in the symposium Versuche zu einer Soziologie des Wissens, edited by M. 
Scheler, Munich-Leipzig, 1924. 



204 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

groups. Realism was the style of thought of the Church, possessor 
of central power over the most inclusive organized body of the 
time. Nominalism, which developed later, found its adherents 
among lower ranks in the Church hierarchy, that is, at the levels 
of the bishopric, of the parish, etc. The correlation between styles 
of thought and competing groups is visible even at this stage — 
the antagonists in the social struggle are the same as the antag- 
onists in the ideological sphere. But all this is merely a preamble to 
a social and ideological differentiation which will be far more fully 
developed during subsequent centuries. 

The Church was met by a formidable opponent in the rise of 
the absolute state, which also sought to monopolize the means of 
education in order to dispense the official interpretation of reality; 
this time, however, the chief educational instrument was to be 
science. Honigsheim points out the essential similarity between 
this kind of thought and ecclesiastical scholasticism, and on the 
basis of their structural similarity he even gives the name 'schol- 
astic' to this state-monopolized form of thought. 

Universities and academies (on the sociology of the latter, 
Dilthey's investigations ^ have produced interesting material), 
from now on claim a rival 'monopoly' besides the older monopoly 
of the Church. 

But the importance of these institutionally protected types of 
thought was greatly overshadowed by others arising among 
concrete social groups which played an increasingly important 
part in shaping the public interpretation of reality. 

Earlier, too, as we saw, there had existed an 'unofficial', every- 
day type of thinking, which showed marked variations from one 
social group and region to another. However, as long as the mon- 
opoly of the Church remained intact, this type of thinking did not 
aspire towards the dignity of the official interpretation of reality. 

There is a democratizing tendency in the mere fact that the 
secular interpretation of the world as put forward by the lay mind 
claims recognition as an official interpretation. This movement is 
most clearly to be observed and understood in the claim of the 
Protestant sects to interpret the Bible in their own fashion. It is 
not the place here to enumerate all those various concrete social 
groups which from now on play an increasingly important role in 
shaping the public interpretation of reality, and, in fact, vie 
with each other in trying to make their own interpretation the 
dominant one. These groups never ceased to multiply from the 
break-up of the ecclesiastical monopoly to the time of the French 
Revolution. 

At one moment it is the Court and the so-called 'Court nobility' 
1 W. Dilthey, Gesammelte Schriften, Berlin-Leipzig, 1927, vol. IV. 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 205 

associated with it, who seek to set the tone for the prevaiHng way 
of Hfe and thought; at another it is the patriciate, the 'big' 
bourgeoisie, and high finance which try to dictate the fashion 
through their salons; these groups imitated the Court and the 
nobihty in certain things, but for the most part, conscious of their 
birthright, they developed a mental attitude appropriate to their 
circumstances, and a way of thinking to match it. Later on, the 
middle and small bourgeoisie enter the scene; at their social level, 
the parsonage had emerged, some time before, as the centre of a 
specific style of life. These, however, are just a few summary 
examples selected from a large variety of groups of different 
character which arise side by side as society becomes more complex 
and diflferentiated. We will omit the detailed description of this 
world with its many competing groups and will try instead to 
outline the basic characteristics of the kind of thought correspond- 
ing to this particular mode of competition. 

What strikes us first is a negative characteristic of this type of 
thought: it is, for the most part, no longer concerned with fitting 
new facts into a given ordo. Carried to its extreme, it brooks no 
dogma and no authority when it comes to judging things. 

Descartes' method is paradigmatic in this respect. To doubt 
everything which cannot maintain itself before the tribunal of 
reason, to be able to account for one's thinking as a whole, 
beginning with its most fundamental postulates, this is the Car- 
tesian ideal — an attitude which puts a premium on epistemology. 

Men wanted to think free of all presuppositions, that is, free 
of all but the indispensable assumptions necessitated by Reason 
5^s such; and the attempt was made to find what these ultimate 
assumptions actually were. The programme was only slowly 
fulfilled; but the more it was realized, the more clearly a fact 
nobody had thought of before became visible — namely, that 
people actually did not think along the same lines. It became clear, 
for instance, that people in Manchester did not think like people 
in German Pietist circles, nor, again, people in the French salons 
like people in the German universities. Every concrete group had 
its own perspective, diflferent from the others. 

Translated into terms of logic, this has the following implication 
for each of the styles of thought in question: for every concrete 
group with its particular perspective, another sphere of reality 
will become paradigmatic, and acquire the ontological dignity of 
the actually existing. 1 Every area of reality, however, fosters one 

1 On the subject of social differentiation in ontology, cf. K. Mannheim, 
'Das Konservative Denken'. Soziologische Beitrdge zum Werden des politisch- 
historischen Denkens in Deutschland. Archiv fur Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik. 
Vol. 57, pp. 489 ff. (to be published in a later volume of this series). 



2o6 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

particular cognitive attitude, one mode of thought — that which 
is most appropriate to the task of exploring the area in question. 
Just as certain areas of existence acquire a particular ontological 
dignity, certain types of cognition acquire a particular epistemo- 
logical dignity. In our times, for instance, the epistemological 
primacy belongs to the type of knowledge represented by exact 
natural science. 

Concrete thought is really much more varied than textbook 
logic would have us believe. It is impossible fully to characterize 
actual thinking with the principle of contradiction, and a few 
related formal propositions. Even in its formal structure, actual 
thought is infinitely varied; and this variety is rooted in the 
fundamental patterns thought develops in its efforts to master one 
particular area of reality. Different modes of thought are charac- 
terized in the first place by concrete schemata or 'models' (e.g. 
those of which physicists speak), and these models differ according 
to the area of reality which served as frame of reference to the 
primary act of orientation which gave rise to the model. 

While in Manchester (the name, of course, stands only as a 
symbol of a certain turn of mind) economy was the field of primary 
experience, providing frames of reference and dominant thought 
patterns particularly suited to this medium, in pietistic circles in 
Germany the primary, paradigmatic experience was the experi- 
ence of religious revival. In a group whose primary orientation is 
economic, attempts to grasp the structural laws of history are also 
based on economic thought patterns; in Germany, on the other 
hand, interpretations of history are inspired by experiences of 
revival (e.g. Johannes von Miiller, Ranke, Hegel, etc. The 
religious origins of the Hegelian categorial scheme used in inter- 
preting history were clearly brought to light by recent research). 

In addition to these paradigmatic experiences peculiar to the 
various concrete groups — which we mention only as examples, 
without seeking completeness — there also were others, partly 
carried over from an early period and partly quite new — thus, 
we find side by side thinkers who use the category of 'mechanism' 
and 'organism' respectively, each trying to make his principle of 
explanation the universally valid one. The various concrete groups 
put forward different schemata of orientation, and so in the end 
we find that methodological differences reflect the struggle between 
different primary paradigmatic experiences peculiar to various 
concrete groups. 

It is part of the process of democratization of mental life that 
each particular perspective aspired to become the universally 
accepted frame of reference, and it is the task of a sociology of 
the mind to show that even in methodology itself, in the guise 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 207 

of the various patterns of thought, what are, ultimately, in conflict 
are social forces and social impulses. 

This process of atomistic competition among concrete groups, 
which resulted in an increasingly radical rejection of an externally 
given ordo (as recognized by the monopolistic type of thought), 
and in the aspiration to base thinking upon rational assumptions 
exclusively — this process in the end has led to the following results, 
which have only just become clearly visible to us, after being 
denied by many: once this genuinely modem stage is reached, 
there exists {a) no universally accepted set of axioms, {b) no 
universally recognized hierarchy of values, and [c) nothing but 
radically different ontologies and epistemologies. 

Everything seemed to go to pieces, as though the world in 
which one lived were not the same. In place of the old ordo, we 
now have the multi-polar conception of the world which tries to 
do justice to the same set of newly emerging facts from a number 
of different points of view. 

As a reaction to the increasing fragmentation brought about by 
atomistic competition, a fourth t)^e of competition developed, 
\vhich is the dominant type in our era — a process of concentration 
of the competing groups and types of orientation. 

Here again, we can best elucidate the mental aspects of our 
problem by pointing to analogous processes in the economic 
sphere. Just as, through the agency of competition, different 
markets (originally self-contained and isolated) become inter- 
dependent (a fact which is expressed in the increasing uniformity 
of price-levels), or, to take another example, just as in the labour 
market, organizations of employers and workers tend to emerge in 
place of individual bargainers, so in the intellectual sphere we 
find that the many local and fractional conflicts on the one hand 
tend to become increasingly interdependent, and, on the other, to 
be polarized into extremes. This kind of polarization process is 
exemplified in the growing consolidation of two camps we may 
already identify by their mottoes: rationalism and irrationalism. 
We can observe the details of this process of consolidation — e.g. 
follow the way in which different types of 'irrationalism' merged 
and established a common front against 'rationalism' (these 
different types of irrationalism include: the particularism of feudal 
estates in their struggle against centralistic absolutism, romantic 
irrationalism glorifying individuality and personality, pietistic 
irrationalism, opposed to the institutional discipline of the Church, 
etc.).i 



1 A more detailed examination of this can be found in my paper on 'Con- 
servative Thought'. See footnote, p. 205. 



2o8 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

W'hile those who lack expert economic knowledge see only 
individual local markets with which the individual now deals 
directly and will continue to deal in the future, the economist can 
already visualize the emergence of an integrated world market. 
In analogous fashion, the sociologist must look beyond the direct 
relationships in which individuals are engaged and discover the 
decisive polarities behind the controversies of the various schools 
of thought, and attempt to grasp the ultimate important extremes 
behind the various local conflicts. The partial antagonisms, in 
which one school or concrete group is pitted against another, are 
being gathered up into decisive major intellectual currents and 
countercurrents combating one another. 

This brings us to the problem of the function of doctrinal 
currents {Geistesstrommigen) . There had been doctrinal currents in 
earlier times too, but they were more in the nature of reflections 
and reproductions of certain fundamental attitudes, modes of 
interpretation, and the like. It is also true that these currents even 
in earlier times gave rise to countercurrents. But none of these 
earlier currents ^vas so unequivocally functional in nature, and 
none of them reflected so closely a process of concentration and 
polarization of concrete groups, as. contemporary doctrinal 
currents. 

And this is comprehensible. The world, after all, had never 
before formed, under the organizing influence of economic forces, 
a unified coherent whole, and consequently, groups with a struc- 
turally analogous position could never before be encountered in 
every region of the world. The new function of doctrinal currents, 
then, consists in enabling spatially separated groups of structurally 
analogous position to coalesce, by giving currency to ways of life 
and attitudes which originally arose within a narrow group and 
there proved helpful in solving or at least artistically expressing 
some typical problem. All other groups beset by similar problems 
then will tend to adopt the basic attitude in question, while 
groups which have the opposite outlook and interests will be the 
more strongly impelled to project their antagonistic attitude by 
creating or joining a doctrinal countercurrent. 

Two important groups of phenomena (or what may be called 
a dual movement) are called forth by this situation. On the one 
hand, a doctrinal current, expanding from the nucleus of the 
concrete group within which it originated, tends to mediate 
among the impulses and modes of interpretation of the other 
groups that join it — groups with an analogous position but yet 
with a different concrete experience. On the other hand, in the 
measure as it 'travels' — i.e. as it is adopted by people adhering to 
various Avays of life — the doctrinal cun^ent will absorb ingi^edients 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 209 

from all these alien substances, from the different local environ- 
ments. 

Thus, doctrinal currents make for uniformity — but also for a 
conservation of the peculiarities of local conditions. 

The Enlightenment, for instance, arose in England as the 
expression of a mental and spiritual attitude most nearly appro- 
priate to a capitalist society. A t)^ically modern conception of the 
world was projected from within a very narrow sphere and 
expanded into France, where it roused all those groups and 
individuals whose position was analogous. In so far as the charac- 
teristic elements of English thought were seized upon by these 
French groups, the latter necessarily sacrificed certain ways of 
thinking more congruent with their situation; but in so far as 
they transformed the alien stimulus and added certain specific 
elements (such as a greater radicalism) to it, they endowed the 
current with a distinctive national note. A specifically French 
'Enlightenment' arose. The same process of incorporation and 
modification went on in Germany; there, as is ^vell known, the 
Enlightenment was theologized. 

This is how the formal structure of a 'current', as such, brings 
about a concentration of impulses formerly fragmentated in 
atomistic competition. An even greater integi"ative force, however, 
lies in the fact that political life since the French Revolution has 
imposed increasingly clear-cut decisions and a correspondingly 
effective polarization of modes of thought and attitudes — and this 
not only in the narrowly political sphere. 

While in the case of Montesquieu and Herder it is hard to 
ascertain whether their type of thought stands for progress or 
reaction (Wahl, for example, has shown a duality in this respect 
in the work of Montesquieu^), inasmuch as their styles of thought 
and mode of experience are to a large extent ambivalent, the 
revolutions of 1789, 1830, and 1848 have brought about an in- 
creasing polarization of society in nearly every respect. Not that 
ambivalent thought disappears altogether (especially if we take 
ambivalence to mean that one and the same philosophy can 
become associated with more than one political trend— or vice 
versa, that one and the same political trend can be combined with 
more than one philosophy); but there is a decreasing scope for 
such ambivalences. As the process of concentration goes on, it 
becomes easier and easier to identify a certain attitude as to 
whether it is 'liberal', 'conservative', 'socialist', etc. 

Moreover, it is fundamentally false to suppose — as unpolitical 
observers, who are unaware of the volitional basis of every theory, 

1 Wahl, A., 'Montesquieu als Vorlaufer von Aktion and Reaktion', Histor- 
ische Z^itschrift, vol. 109, 191 2. 
E.S.K. — 14 



2IO COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

are tempted to do — that all that happens in this connection is that 
existing political movements cast about for a philosophical 
companion with which they can ally themselves. In fact, if these 
combinations merely depended on a process of concentration in 
the political and related spheres, the whole phenomenon of 
concentration we are examining here would merely concern the 
study of 'ideologies', and it could be said that these phenomena 
may be observed in politics, but cannot affect intellectual life 
in its 'higher objectivity'. It would follow that a philosophy which 
linked itself with a political tendency would be degraded into a 
mere 'ideology' ; real philosophy, in its purity, however, could have 
nothing to do with the influence we have shown social factors to 
exercise upon the mental sphere. If someone thinks along these 
lines, if he looks at things in such a non-activistic, non-political 
spirit, then it is difficult to make him see. All one can do is to make 
him realize in case after case that philosophy — -just any particular 
philosophy not yet deliberately allied to any political cause — is 
always the product of a particular mentality, and that already at its 
birth, before ever any clear relation to politics is developed, a 
philosophy already reflects a peculiar direction of the interpretive 
impulse; a peculiar style of thought, which in most cases stems 
from a deeper root that this philosophy has in common with the 
corresponding political trend with which it later becomes associ- 
ated. When Liberalism links up with the Enlightenment, it is just 
like the reunion and mutual recognition of long-separated children 
of the same mother. Thus, it is utterly wrong to apply an atomistic 
method to the history of ideas and concentrate exclusively upon 
combinations and reciprocal influences ascertainable between 
ideas and thought motifs as such; what we have to do is to observe 
how the synthesis in the realm of ideas is determined by a 
primary concentration in the realm of the thought impulses. It 
has been said that we must learn to think in terms of 'economic 
systems' (Sombart, speaking at the meeting of the Verein fiir 
Sozialpolitik) . I would urge in the same vein, that in dealing with 
the history of ideas, we had better think in terms oi styles of thought. 
I mean to say that it is impossible to achieve an understanding 
of the modern process of concentration in the realm of doctrinal 
currents as long as one concentrates exclusively upon the filiations 
of motifs one can observe at the surface, instead of employing the 
fundamentally decisive processes of integration and division at 
the level of the group will which alone can give a meaning to 
the secondary processes making up the history of OTo/«y filiations. 
After this short account of the polarizing and concentrating 
functions of modern doctrinal currents, we must ask the question 
whiether there are no mental processes making for concentration 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 211 

besides the doctrinal currents. On closer inspection, it is clear that 
a 'current' as the vehicle of a 'polarized' mental attitude cannot 
carry ways of thinking from their region of origin into other regions 
unless the polarization had somehow been accomplished in the 
region of origin. Before, then, the doctrinal current can start on 
its way, there must be, in its source region, a process bringing 
about an initial concentration and polarization. 

It therefore becomes our task to examine this process of initial 
polarization more closely. The question facing us is how such a 
polarization can come about before any doctrinal current makes 
itself felt. What is the method Life applies when it merges many 
particular volitional positions into one comprehensive platform? 

The method used by Life, the process through which the 
existentially-determined positions of thinking subjects become 
amalgamated, is, once again, competition, which in this case 
operates to select out the impulses that are to be retained. 

In a recent essay making an important contribution to this 
subject, Thurnwaldi proposed to substitute the term 'sifting' for 
'selection'; and Miinzner^ also made use of a selective or 'sifting' 
mechanism in explaining the propagation of 'public opinion'. 

Our theory, to say it again, is concerned with something far 
more fundamental than the formation and propagation of public 
opinion, which in itself is only a superficial feature of intellectual 
life. The point I want to make is that processes of change in the 
deepest strata of world interpretation, modifications of the cate- 
gorial apparatus itself, can to a large extent be explained in 
terms of competition. That men at a given place and time think 
in terms of such and such concepts and categories becomes for us 
a problem calling for, and capable of, explanation in concrete 
detail, lather than a brute historical fact we merely have to 
record. 

Similarly, the principle of competition and the related principle 
of selection will be found to furnish the most natural explanation 
for certain facts recorded by the history of ideas — that, for instance, 
certain political and philosophical positions become polarized and 
maintain themselves in the course of development, while others 
fall by the wayside or are caught up by the countercurrents. As 
evidence for my thesis, I shall mention a concrete example of the 
formation of an ideological 'platform' on the basis of competition 
and selection — i.e. the genesis of the ideological platform of the 
German Conservative Party. Here, as always, it can be seen that 
an intellectual or volitional position, as any type of interpretation 

1 Thurnwald, R., 'Fiihrerschaft und Siebung', Z^itschrift fiir Volkerpsychologie 
und Soziologie, Jahrgang II, 1926. 

2 Miinzner, G., Offeniliche Meinung und Presse. Karlsruhe, 1928. 



212 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

of reality, does not suddenly come from nowhere, but is arrived 
at through a process of selection from a variety of beliefs and 
impulses of competing groups. 

What can here be shown as true of the formation of a political 
platform, applies also, mutatis mutandis, to all existentially-deter- 
mined thought. We are of the opinion that one runs far less risk 
of going astray if one proposes to explain intellectual movements in 
political terms than if one takes the opposite course and from a 
purely theoretical attitude projects a merely contemplative, 
internal, theoretical thought pattern on to the concrete, actual 
life process itself. In actual life, it is always some volitional centre 
which sets thought going; competition, victory, and the selection 
based upon it, largely determine the movement of thought. 

It is not intended to give the impression that mental life as a 
whole is a purely political matter, any more than earlier we wished 
to make of it a mere segment of economic life; we merely want to 
direct attention to the vital and volitional element in existentially- 
determined thought which is easiest to grasp in the political 
sphere, and to place it in a proper light, thus counteracting the 
misleading influence of the German historical tradition with its 
one-sided emphasis upon a contemplative approach. 

The process of formation of a conservative platform began with 
the emergence, here and there, of groups impelled to adopt a 
defensive position in face of the new social reality that was arising. 
Firstly, there were the old feudal circles, then certain literary 
groups more and more leaning towards reaction, then the 
representatives of bureaucracy, and certain university circles 
became more and more conservative, and so on. Each of these 
groups brought with it a way of thinking, capable of exact 
stylistic analysis, which was specifically adapted to its own 
situation, traditions, etc.; and each experienced its opposition to 
the gradually emerging modern world in a specifically different 
fashion. Each discovered this opposition at a different point in 
the process of internal and external change, and each produced 
a different ideology to express its opposition. 

At first, these different oppositions emerged as isolated and 
atomistic units, but they tended to amalgamate as soon as they 
came up against a common opponent. Liberalism first found 
theoretical expression in a coherent statement of its aims; this 
statement necessarily elicited from Conservatism the formulation 
of a programmatic counterstatement. That this was 'necessarily' 
the case is implied in the structure of the competitive situation. 
A sort of 'competition on the basis of quality', which forces each 
party to catch up with its opponent, and to duplicate the latter's 
achievements (Sombart) forced the Conservatives, although 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 213 

systematic thought is by no means their forte, to produce a 
systematic theoretical platform. 

This is not achieved so easily, however. Many decades pass 
before its completion. The delay is partly attributable to the 
difficulties of reaching an agreement: each faction, each individual 
group wants to have its particular point of view accepted as the 
official creed of the Conservative Party. 

Stahl was the first person to achieve a synthesis of the competing 
conservative ideologies in his system of the philosophy of law, 
and through his practical work on the programme of the Con- 
servative Party: and, curiously enough, his system as an amalgam 
of disparate intellectual elements is an exact replica of the 
equilibrium achieved by the competing social groups within the 
conservative camp. The same is true, not only of the structure 
of the political platform, but also of the philosophical substructure 
underlying the conservative interpretation of the world. The 
complete rejection of Hegelian pantheism was a direct answer 
to the adoption of this pantheism by the left-wing groups of the 
'young Hegelians'; the victory of personalistic irrationalism was a 
result of the increasingly thorough elimination of all liberal- 
rational elements from the interpretation of the world, now 
deliberately restricted to irrationalistic terms. A complete analysis 
of this example — which, however, we cannot attempt at this 
juncture^ — would yield the conclusion that, whenever a compre- 
hensive movement comes into being as a result of the banding 
together of formerly isolated groups, it is possible to follow up to 
the highest level of abstraction the process of how a mixture of 
various ways of thinking comes about, showing the same strands 
and proportions as the concrete groups participating in the new 
movement. 

Observation of the genesis of the Marxist platform of the 
socialist movement would reveal the same structural phenomena 
we saw associated with the genesis of the conservative platform. 
It will be sufficient to mention one sequence of events which 
best illuminate our thesis — the struggle between Marx and 
Bakunin. 

That the official programme of Socialism finally was couched 
in 'dialectical' terms, that it completely rejected the mental 
attitude corresponding to the eruptive anarchistic way of acting 
and made short shrift of the anti-historical, eschatological view 

^ Because of the impossibility of a detailed analysis, I must refer again to 
the paper on 'Conservative Thought', in which I have tried to show in detail 
the intermingling of the fundamental conceptual systems of two concrete 
groups engaged in the process of merging their differences in a common 
movement. 



214 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

according to which anything may happen at any moment — this 
intellectual event is merely the reflection, in the logical sphere, of 
the massive political fact that Marx's faction was victorious over 
that of Bakunin. 

The victory of the logical category of dialectic as a key to the 
interpretation of history over a non-historical, eschatological 
doctrine which recognizes no definite articulation in history and 
hence has no use for the concept of evolution but considers 
revolution as possible and necessary at any instant — this doctrinal 
victory reflects the victory of one faction over another, the success 
of one competitor in the struggle over the question of whose philo- 
sophy will serve as the party's official interpretation of reality. 

But even where the impulse for the merging of positions is not 
a political one, we find that there is always a volitional element at 
the bottom of such phenomena. Positions are — as we said above- 
never combined through the simple summation of elements of 
thought, but always as a result of the meeting of fundamental 
impulses of will, modes of interpretation, conceptions of reality. 
The merging of these positions is achieved, not by the contempla- 
tive subject within us (if it is at all legitimate to distinguish a 
contemplative from an active subject), but by the active and 
ultimately — in so far as activity directed at changing the world is 
in the end political — the political one. 

If, therefore, in analysing the fusion of ideas, we focus our 
attention upon their volitional source rather than their manifest 
content, and try to find out what controls the combinations into 
which thought impulses enter, we shall find that in the last 
analysis the movement of thought depends upon the tensions 
which dominate the social sphere. 

After this general characterization of the fourth type of competi- 
tion, that corresponding to the stage of concentration, we again 
have to ask: What is thinking like at this stage of evolution? How 
is the structure of our society and intellectual culture reflected in 
the situation facing our thinking? 

In the first place, we find ourselves today with no uniform 
basis for thought. It is not merely that we have no uniform ordo 
into which we can fit every newly-emerging fact, but we are 
approaching a situation in which the exact opposite will be true. 

This new situation has arisen in three stages. The first stage 
was, as we saw, the multipolarity of the basic positions. Concentra- 
tion of these positions gradually produced the second stage, where 
we can speak of positions merged to form a few rival platforms. 
These platforms, however, must not be imagined as in any way 
static or unchanging, but always as dynamic. That is to say, they 
always adjust themselves in form and structure in response to 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 215 

new situations as they arise. This historical transformation is for 
the most part unknown to the various individuals who adhere to 
the platform in question. Only the historian, able to look back 
over long stretches of time, is really in a position to say what 
changes Liberalism and Socialism, Positivism or Historicism have 
undergone since their inception. 

The individual who approaches the facts in terms of a definite 
platform does have an order pattern at this stage; it is only the 
"public' as a whole that no longer sustains the same ordo: the old, 
coherent picture of the world is shattered and split into fragments. 

If this dynamic movement continues at the same rate (and if no 
stabilizing tendency prevails, resulting either in a consensus, or 
in the emergence of a monopoly situation), then a state of affairs 
will arise in which thinking will no longer consist in fitting facts 
into a preconceived ordo but quite the contrary, in challenging 
the validity of any order pattern into which new facts do not 
readily fit. 

To those who are conversant with the existential relativity of 
knowledge, and who reserve their position rather than commit 
themselves unconditionally and exclusively to one particular 
doctrine, the situation facing our thinking today appears as 
follows: various groups are engaged in existential experiments with 
particular order patterns, none of which has sufficient general 
validity to encompass in toto the whole of present-day reality. 
Against the thrust of every individual position seeking to achieve 
predominance over all others, there seems to be only one com- 
pensatory influence at work, that is the fact that positions do get 
fused in spite of everything — as if life itself, seeking to gain clarity 
about itself, tried to do justice to the growing complexity of the 
historical situation by constantly broadening the basis of 
thinking. 

However, we had better not probe too far ahead of the situation 
as it exists today, or treat plausible hypotheses as if they were 
realities. Let us take up a purely factual problem instead. 

Is it possible to demonstrate the truth of our statement that 
at the stage of concentration in the evolution of competition a 
polarization of forms of thought takes place? A really exact and 
stringent proof could be given only on the basis of a philological 
and historical analysis. Such an analysis would have to examine 
the most important elements of our thought (concepts, images, 
and categories) to see whether any tendency towards polarization 
could be found in them, that is, whether it could be shown that 
the Conservative tends to see problems differently, to use concepts 
with a different meaning, or to order the world in categories 
different from the Liberal or the Socialist, and so on. 



2i6 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

Such proof can obviously not be put forward here in a complete 
form — even for a single case. What we can do is to illustrate 
rather than prove our thesis by pointing out a few examples of 
typical polarizations in modem thought, standing in visible 
affinity to polarization in the social and poHtical field. Needless 
to say, these examples will all be 'ideal types' — ideally-typical 
concatenations of motives. Every concrete case is likely to have its 
own peculiarities, and if it cannot be completely fitted into any 
one of our types, it should not be put down as an instance in- 
validating our thesis. The point I want to make is that those 
polarizations which I shall mention represent the historically 
decisive trends; if this is true, it follows that any seeming exception 
must be explained in terms of particular constellations and specific 
conditions. 

The greatest clarity can be achieved in studying polarization 
if we examine various typical attitudes toward one and the same 
problem. I choose one of the most important and instructive 
problems in this context — ^that of value-fi^ee knowledge ( Wertfrei- 
heit) . 

The ideally-typical attitudes to this problem of the different 
parties can be briefly outlined as follows : 

A. Liberalism: — was characterized from the very beginning by 
a typically intellectualistic approach, and sought to achieve a 
clear separation of the rational from the irrational. Alfi^ed Weber 
once said that the outstanding mark of modernism in thought was 
the endeavour to purge all thinking of its irrational elements. It is 
admitted, of course, that living (undisciplined) thought is a medley 
of theory and a-theoretical, purely volitional elements, but it is 
believed that if one tries hard, one can purge the theory of all 
admixtures of volitional impulse, irrationality, and evaluation. 
One was primarily interested in being able to argue (Carl Schmitt, 
following Donoso Cortes,! has declared this to be the really 
distinguishing characteristic of the Liberal bourgeoisie), and in 
genuine intellectualistic fashion, one believed that rational 
tensions grounded in existential differences could be reduced to 
differences in thinking which, however, it was possible to iron 
out by virtue of the uniformity of reason. 

That Liberals and Democrats are middle-of-the-road parties 
is another reason why they are interested in creating a platform 
for discussion and mediation where the other parties can meet. 
This faith in mediation and discussion is incompatible with 
admitting the existence of irreconcilable differences, of conflicts 

^ Carl Schmitt, Politische Theologie. Vier Kapitel zur Lehre von der Souverdnitat, 
Munich-Leipzig, 1922; pp. 52 ff. Cf. also by the same author: Die geistesgeschicht- 
liche Lage des heutigen Parlamentarismiis, 2nd edition, Munich-Leipzig, 1926. 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 217 

that cannot be settled by purely intellectual means. Since this 
theory holds that evaluation can be separated from theory as a 
matter of principle, it refuses from the outset to recognize the 
existence of the phenomenon of existentially-determined thought 
— of a thought containing by definition, and inseparably, irra- 
tional elements woven into its very texture. 

B. Conservatism, as the right-wing opposition combating 
modernism, insists precisely on the primacy of the irrational. 
From the conservative point of view, the irrational is essentially 
the core of one's fundamental convictions {das Weltanschauliche). 
The Conservative is amenable to the idea that all thinking is 
nourished by a set of fundamental convictions, and tends to trace 
back to such convictions even things seemingly completely devoid 
of irrationality, such as exact mathematical knowledge, or 
capitalistic accounting and calculation. The conservative type of 
thinking attains its most pointed expression when it offers proof 
that even the most rational phenomena of modern culture are at 
bottom irrational — that, for instance, capitalistic reliance on 
calculation is itself not based upon calculation but upon a funda- 
mental conviction which, although beyond rational proof, ex- 
presses itself in highly rational terms. 

C. Socialism represents a third position with regard to irration- 
ality — it qualifies the thinking of the adversary as irrational. It is 
significant to note, however, where the irrational manifests itself 
according to the Socialist \dew. The irrational which is in- 
extricably interwoven wdth the rational, and prevents the latter 
from manifesting itself in its pristine purity, is not some funda- 
mental conviction but interest — and collective, class-determined 
interest at that. To understand this difference of interpretation 
we must again consider the concrete group situations of the mem- 
bers of both parties, and the way in which these situations deter- 
mine experiences of the latter. When the Conserv^ative looks at 
himself introspectively, he sees — quite truthfully — still unques- 
tioned religious, traditional, and hierarchical motives which hold 
his thinking in their grip. As to the interested motives underlying 
his actions, which for the most part operate unconsciously, he is 
at first completely unaware of them. For if the structure of society 
is such that the existing institutions automatically promote our 
interests and guarantee the satisfaction of our aspirations, inter- 
ested motives are, so to speak, appropriated by the objective social 
order itself. If I simply live in the framework of these institutions, 
I never need become aware of these interested motives, as a 
conscious part of my personal experience. They, then, will not 
be revealed by introspection. Thus, for example, the patriarchal 
squire of an estate, so long as there is no question of any challenge 



2i8 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

to his rights over his property and his control over his tenants, will 
discover by introspection only his benevolent patriarchal feelings. 
And, from this point of view, we can understand how certain 
very rich people (especially women) can entertain a completely 
sublimated, un-egoistic attitude. The structure of society, so to 
speak, takes care of the egoistic motivations they need to preserve 
the style in which they live. 

But with the proletarian awakening to class-consciousness, it 
is quite different. Just because in all situations the opposition he 
meets is of this kind, he will tend to discover the hidden determin- 
ing class interest at every point of the social structure. The 
irrationalities of the various sets of fundamental convictions do 
not interest him; he either overlooks them deliberately, or trans- 
lates them willy-nilly into class-interests. 

We have called 'interest' in this connection 'irrational', because 
it is a factor alien to and disrupting the self-sufficient abstractness , 
of 'pure theory'. Proletarian thought, then, discovers — as noted 
before — situationally-determined (here, interest-determined) 
thought in the adversary. But what of its own thought? There were 
two possibilities: proletarian thought could go the way of Liberal- 
ism and, remaining within the tradition of natural law, interpret 
itself as 'pure theory'; or it could — in countries where thinking- 
was more influenced by historicism — recognize its own irrationality 
(dependence on interests), but then have recourse to a theory of 
pre-established harmony so as to make itself coincide with the 
idea of truth, (That is, the particular class-interests of the prole- 
tariat are identified with those of society as a whole: proletarian 
class-consciousness is the adequate and right consciousness, as 
with Marxian tradition in the form given it by Lukacs.) 

The polarization which we have just tried to demonstrate in 
relation to the problem of value-free knowledge reappears in 
connection with nearly every important and controversial concept; 
this polarization affects the very categorial apparatus of thinking 
itself. 

I could even go farther, and demonstrate to you that even 
seemingly primitive fundamental concepts such as what 'practice' 
is and how it is related to 'theory' — concepts which, one might 
think, can be construed in only one way — are seen in a different 
light, depending on the pole of the social body at which one is 
situated. 1 To mention only one final example instead of many, 
showing how even the categorial apparatus of thinking has become 

1 I have attempted to give an extensive analysis of this example in terms of 
the sociology of knowledge in my investigation: 'The Prospects of Scientific 
Polities', to be found in my book 'Ideology' and Utopia'. London, 1937, 
Kegan Paul. 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 219 

socially and politically differentiated as the result of competition 
at the stage of concentration: The greatest difficulty besetthig 
our thinking today is, one might say, that we can make use 
of a number of entirely different categories in giving a scientific 
account of a given historical event. The chief damage to objec- 
tivity and impartiality does not lie in the fact that historians are 
taking different sides on political matters, or other matters of 
value. Such differences could be eliminated by a strict abstention 
from any evaluation; in this fashion, one would obtain a corrected 
field of positionally neutral theory. The danger, however, lies 
much deeper than that, and it seems to me that the usual formula- 
tion of this problem, which mainly stresses abstention from value 
judgments, fails to do full justice to the difficulties involved. The 
real danger lies in the fact that one can use fundamentally different 
order patterns and categories already in isolating one's material, 
in deffiiing one's subject-matter. 

Thus, since the political and social polarization of thinking 
set in, we have had the contrast between a 'synthesizing' and an 
'analytical' presentation of history, or, to put it more sharply: 
we have had at the one extreme, an interpretation of history 
based on analysis, and at the other, an interpretation based upon 
morphological intuition. This is a very fundamental antithesis. 
Its antecedents reach far back into the past history of thought. But 
what is of importance for us in the period under discussion, is 
that earned over into the field of historical and political inter- 
pretations of the world, this antithesis tends to an increasing 
extent to become the basis of that modern differentiation into 
opposing 'platforms' ■ of which we spoke above. The decisive 
importance of this antithesis is due to the fact that it plays a large 
role even in the original delimitation and definition of the subject- 
matter; even in dealing with a single object (be it an individual 
human being, or an event) one's conclusions depend to a decisive 
extent on whether one is practising the 'morphological' or 'ana- 
lytical' approach. 

It makes a great difference to the way in which we conceive 
and present the history of a series of events or the deeds of an 
individual, whether we regard them as developments of a pre- 
existing 'germ' (tending, so to speak, towards a predestined goal), 
or whether we consider everything as constituting a particular 
complex of general characteristics which in other circumstances 
could be differently combined. 

In the morphological attitude, which sees the object as the 
product of an inevitable development towards a prescribed goal, 
from a germ already inherent in it, there lies a deep-lying con- 
servative impulse, aiming at continuity and persistence which is 



220 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

more fundamental than mere political Conservatism; this is the 
gesture of benediction of one who feels that what is, is good. If 
the contemplation of Being is placed higher than its breaking 
down by analysis, a peculiar feeling of stability results. Then, 
whatever is here and now will tend to be taken as 'Being as such'. 
This need not happen in every case, because even this type of 
intuitive thinking may manage to reject a 'bad' reality through 
the expedient of distinguishing between essence and mere con- 
, tingent factuality. But this is an exceptional case which we need 
\ not consider further, since we are dealing here with the funda- 
mental 'ideal types' of sociologically determined thinking rather 
than with its detailed historical description. It is sometimes useful 
for the coherence of scientific research to neglect exceptions and 
concentrate upon the main trends of evolution. 

Intuitive contemplation itself is not without an analytical 
component — -but this is fundamentally different from the sort of 
analysis we mentioned above, which comprises the two separate 
processes of dissection and recombination. The kind of analysis 
inherent in intuition follows the natural articulation of the object: 
it senses its general structure without splitting it up. If it is a 
question of a development through time, this sort of analysis 
traces the development as at each stage it permits the anticipated 
developmental goal to emerge more clearly. The moment we 
conceive reality, the given, in morphological, intuitive terms, we 
have virtually immobilized it even before anything has been said. 
This is, at least, what we observe at the moment of the original 
parting of the ways between Conservative and Progressive 
thought — at that point in the historical evolution, it was 
Conservatism which made use of this intuitive approach towards 
reality. 

Exactly the opposite is the case with the dissecting type of 
analysis. As soon as the object is conceived in analytical terms, it 
no longer is what it was as a correlate of intuitive contemplation. 
It is already cancelled in its phenomenal immediacy. The way 
in which an object or a meaningful complex appears to us 
intuitively, what it communicates, or what it claims to be or 
mean, is already overlooked, corroded and relativized by virtue 
of the subject's analytical approach. The hidden premise of this 
type of thought is: everything could be otherwise — and the existing 
reality is broken down into its elements from which — if necessary 
— new realities may be put together. This kind of approach in itself 
breaks up reality, makes it fluid; at least, this was the role played 
by analytical thinking when it first came upon the scene during 
. the period we are studying. 

This contrast between intuition and analysis corresponds to 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 221 

another alternative which was recognized as fundamental and 
served to differentiate between the opposing groups at the very- 
beginning of the process of the polarization of platforms (i.e. in 
the discussions at the beginning of the 19th century), the alterna- 
tive between 'making' and 'letting grow'. 

'To make' and 'to grow' are two of those fundamental schemas 
we spoke about before, which exercise a decisive influence on 
people's views of the world, and which are responsible for different 
people's professing different philosophies. Those who study history 
with the pattern of 'making' in mind, break its substance up 
beyond recognition; those, on the other hand, who see history 
under the category of 'growth' are impressed with its finality — 
possibly with the finality of some single event, but mostly with 
that of the historical process as a whole. The concepts 'to make' 
and 'to let grow' represent two extremes in the broad field of 
possible approaches to history; according to what side he is on 
in this great struggle between historical and political forces, an 
individual thinker will consider a larger or smaller part of reality 
as final or as fluid respectively, and this will determine the extent 
to which he will be said to belong to the one or the other style of 
thought. We must content ourselves with these two examples of 
ideal types of polarized thinking. 

We must now ask: Does competition at this stage only bring 
about polarization, or does it also produce synthesis? All those for 
whom it is a foregone conclusion that every social tension is 
beyond conciliation on principle, will cling to that one phase of 
our argument where the tendency towards polarization was 
brought into sharp relief, and interpret it in an absolute sense. 
These are, in the first place, the spokesmen of extreme social and 
intellectual doctrines — including, on the one hand, those who, 
as mentioned before, deny as a matter of principle that any 
existential or intellectual tension can be mediated, and, on 
the other, those who interpret the class-determined interest- 
bound irreconciliability of theoretical differences in an absolute 
sense. 

In our view, these two extreme groups merely catch sight of a 
partial, though relatively justified, aspect of a global situation; 
we, on the other hand, must be open-minded enough to recognize 
the synthesis as well which may come about, in spite of the polari- 
zing process. We hold, in fact, that syntheses do arise in the 
process, and that precisely the syntheses play a particular im- 
portant role in the evolution of thought. 

Syntheses owe their existence to the same social process that 
brings about polarization; groups take over the modes of thought 
and intellectual achievements of their adversaries under the simple 



222 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

law of 'competition on the basis of achievement'. Sombartl 
differentiates in the economic sphere, as is well known, between 
competition on the basis of achievement, of suggestion, and of 
force. Here too, it could be shown how these forms of competition 
are moulded by the general principles of social competition, and 
that they also occur in the region of thought. We will not pursue 
this line of thought farther, however, but will merely point out 
that in the socially-differentiated thought process, even the 
opponent is ultimately forced to adopt those categories and forms 
of thought which are most appropriate for orientation in a given 
type of world order. In the economic sphere, one of the possible 
results of competition is that one competitor is compelled to 
catch up with the other's technological advances. In just the same 
way, whenever groups compete for having their interpretation of 
reality accepted as the correct one, it may happen that one of the 
groups takes over from the adversary some fruitful hypothesis or 
category — anything that promises cognitive gain. Here too, 
instead of demonstrating our thesis, we can only illustrate it with 
one single, though classic, example of a synthesis of this kind — 
i.e. Hegel. Hegel's thought can be considered with some justifica- 
tion as a synthesis between the thought of the Enlightenment with 
its absolutist bent, and the thought of conservative Romanticism 
and Historicism, oriented towards the phenomenon of historical 
change. In the first third of the 19th century, two extreme types 
of thought were facing each other. On the one hand, we find the 
thought of the Enlightenment, with its claim to be determined 
solely by principles of 'rightness' not subject to historical change. 
For this type of thought, it was possible to deduce by pure 
reasoning the principles of the only right solution for any problem; 
everything which opposed this supposedly 'right' solution was 
felt to be merely an impediment, an absolute error. This attitude 
rendered this kind of thought as a matter of fact incapable of 
perceiving the phenomenon of historical genesis and growth. On 
the other hand, there was the historicism of the Conservatives who, 
for their part, denied precisely the possibility of deducing by pure 
reasoning a system of solutions right in themselves. The Con- 
servatives opposed every system — they opposed systems as such. 
They were extremely sceptical with regard to Reason, and 
doubted whether the deductive-constructive method could ever 
produce anything either true or applicable. For them, there 
existed only the object gradually developing through time, and the 
meaning contained in this process of becoming — in the last 
resort, nothing but individual, completely self-contained epochs. 

1 Cf. W. Sombart, Das Wirtschaftsleben im ^eitalter des Hochkapitalismus. 
Munich-Leipzig, 1927. II. Halbband, pp. 557 ff. 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 223 

Truth could only be formulated as relative to this historical 
reality, but never in any absolute way. Ranke provides the 
classical expression of this approach with his remark: "Every epoch 
is God's own' i^Jedes ^eitalter ist unmittelbar zu Gott'). 

Here again, therefore, we have to do with a case of sharp 
polarization, and the function of Hegel's thought, seen within the 
framework of our subject, consisted precisely in overcoming this 
tension. 

He tried to find a position from which both kinds of thought 
could be envisaged in their partial correctness, yet at the same 
time also interpreted as subordinate aspects of a higher synthesis. 
Unfortunately, I cannot give here more than a bare outline 
of his solution: every epoch is a self-contained entity which can 
and must be understood in terms of a standard immanent to 
it. Historical development as a whole, however, the series of these 
individual epochs, represents an approach in progressive stages to 
an Absolute. According to Hegel, this terminal stage of the 
Absolute as an actuality was reached in his time, both in the State 
and in his own philosophical thinking. If we try to interpret this 
concept of the present as the actuality of the Absolute in concrete 
sociological terms, we shall find that it is nothing but the Prussian 
State of Hegel's time, from the standpoint of which he was in fact 
thinking. 

It is not our task here to take our stand for or against this 
solution, but to see how it embodies the attempt to reconcile in a 
synthesis the historical and the absolutist forms of thought. After 
Hegel, it became possible to combine these two thought patterns 
— something nobody had dreamed of as long as the polarization 
tendency alone held sway. The trend towards synthesis of which 
this is a decisive manifestation permeates Hegelian thought 
thi'oughout. Not only is the basic constructive principle he applies 
the reconciliation of antithetical forces in a higher synthesis; 
even in questions of detail, he nearly always synthesizes disparate 
tendencies of his time. His relationship to rationalism and irration- 
aUsm is just such a synthesizing one: it would, therefore, be wi'ong 
to range him either with the rationalist or with the irrationalist 
forces of his time. What he is seeking is a synthesis in which thesis 
and antithesis cancel out. 

Let me now make a further assertion. Sociologically speaking, 
it is by no means accidental that Hegel and no one else should 
have been the discoverer of dialectics. By 'dialectics' I mean here, 
not a schematic logical discipline, but a concrete pattern of living 
history by virtue of which there arise, at first, shaiply antithetical, 
polarized tendencies, which then are reconciled in a higher 
synthesis. That Hegel in particular should have discovered this is 



224 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

in part explicable by the fact that he and his time for the first time 
in history experienced a period of strict polarization (as a result 
of competition at the stage of concentration), followed by a short 
phase of freedom of decision, issuing in the first overall synthesis. 

Actually, Hegel discovered in dialectics (its religious origins, 
recently investigated, are not under discussion here) the law of 
the structure of his own thought, and at the same time the 
fundamental structural law of his time. 

It is indeed significant that about the same time, in France, 
Comte was seeking a synthesis in a similar way. This synthesis of 
course, relating as it does to a quite different situation in France, 
is quite differently constituted in its contents and in its various 
details; nevertheless, Hegel and Comte as intellectual phenomena, 
if envisaged from the point of view of the common rhythm of 
intellectual movements in modern Europe, represent roughly the 
same stage. Oppenheimer^ has recently attempted to analyse 
Comte's thought sociologically as an example of synthesis, and it 
would be both interesting and valuable to subject the Hegel- 
Comte parallel to an exact sociological analysis, not only in 
respect of their similarities, but also in respect of the differences 
between them. 

There are periods in modern history during which a represen- 
tative generation becomes free to achieve a synthesis. Such 
generations take a fresh approach in that they are able to envisage 
from the higher platform of a synthesis those alternatives and 
antagonisms which their fathers had had interpreted in a dogmatic, 
absolute sense. Then, if there are existential problems not yet 
ripe for a solution, such a generation will experience them in 
entirely different contexts; the old antagonisms, how^ever, become 
less sharp, and it will be possible to find a point, so to speak, 
farther back, from which partisan positions can be seen as merely 
partial and relative, and thus transcended. 

(It seems, by the way, that the sociology of knowledge itself 
provides just such a viewpoint 'farther back' from which theo- 
retical philosophical differences which cannot be reconciled on 
the level of manifest content, can be seen through in all their 
partiality and therewith made amenable to a synthesis. The 
existence of this continually receding viewpoint — which one might 
be tempted to interpret inaccurately as a sign of an ever-increasing 
reflexiveness — presents us with a hitherto untouched but never- 
theless important problem of the sociology of knowledge.) 

The problem of synthesis is far too complicated to allow us 
even to approach its solution here. 

1 Oppenheixaer, Richtungen derneueren deutschen Soziologie, Jem., 1928. 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 225 

It must suffice for us to see that syntheses do exist, and that the 
history of thought in modern times provides instances not only of 
polarization, but of association, crossing-over, and synthesis. One 
thing, however, we must not lose sight of: the syntheses are not 
confined to purely intellectual currents; they also represent 
interpretations of social forces. A pure historian of ideas would 
present Hegel's thought as a cross between the 'Enlightenment' 
and historicism; but we must go farther, and on the basis of an 
analysis of the genesis of these t)^es of thought, and of their 
further development, ahvays ask questions like these : which groups 
and strata stood behind historicism? How can we make an exact 
sociological diagnosis of the situation in which synthesis becomes 
possible? Syntheses, too, do not float in an abstract space, un- 
influenced by social gravitation; it is the structural configuration 
of the social situation which makes it possible for them to emerge 
and develop. 

It is thus clear that we believe in no absolute synthesis — one 
which can transcend the historical process and, so to speak, with 
the 'eyes of God' directly comprehend the 'meaning of history'. 
We must steer clear of this self-deception to which Hegel had 
completely succumbed, even if we regard a synthesis as the best 
thing that thought can produce from the point of view of the 
socially unifying function of knowledge. (I repeat: from the point 
of view of the socially unifying function of knowledge. The plan 
of this lecture does not permit me to develop here the comple- 
mentary idea — suggesting the necessary limits of all synthesis — 
that certain existentially-determined elements in thinking can 
never be divested of this character; nor should they, since their 
proper meaning would be obliterated if they were to be engulfed 
in a synthesis.) The instability and relativity of any synthesis is 
shown by the emergence, in place of the homogeneous Hegelian 
system itself, of right and left Hegelianisms. 

If one analyses this schism, however, one sees that there remained 
for both parties an a-problematical residue of the Hegelian 
synthesis, an inventory of concepts and thought-patterns which in 
the previous epoch had themselves been the object of strife. 
Through a process of selection, a certain residue separates itself 
from the mass of problematical material around which the main 
struggle was conducted, and is incorporated almost unnoticed 
into the outlook and primary orientation o£ all parties. In exactly 
the same way, many alleged discoveries and new categories are 
quietly dropped. We can see quite clearly today, for example, 
how the sociological approach — originally sponsored by the 
opposition and combated by dominant groups addicted to an 
ideological orientation — has gradually, almost secretly, become 

E.s.K. — 15 



226 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

generally adopted, simply because it affords the most reliable 
primary orientation pattern in the contemporary situation. 

In a word, then: synthesis means selection. The polarization 
process is accompanied, step by step, by a corresponding counter- 
movement aiming at synthesis. We have already seen that even 
at the party level, a platform is able to emerge only through 
synthesis, that a synthesis is needed to consolidate the partial 
perspectives of individual groups and factions into a party pro- 
gramme exercising a strong enough appeal to give rise to a broad 
'current'; and we have also seen that beyond the scope of these 
intra-party syntheses, there are constant attempts to mediate in an 
overall synthesis the greatest tensions arising in the historical-social 
process. And finally, we saw that although this major synthesis is 
never really achieved, efforts undertaken towards it in the end 
result in the selective accumulation of a common inventory of 
concepts, as it were in a consensus ex post reached by the various 
parties. 

In addition, then, to the primitive consensus, represented by 
the inherited fund of anxieties, emotions, and common-sense 
wisdom, we have to do with a latter-day consensus ex post, born of 
tension and gradually consummating itself in strife. Between 
these, however, lies the turbulent, problematical region of life 
itself within which everything still is open to question. 

Now we have to ask: What is the principle underlying this 
selection? How large a part of the original party platform will 
survive the factional strife within the party, and how much of the 
previously held doctrine will be irretrievably lost in the process? 
Further, what is it that all parties will tacitly take over one from 
the other? What, in the long run, tends to establish itself over and 
above the party consensus as the consensus of an entire historical 
community? 

Evidently that which is most applicable — that is, that which 
each party needs for orientation within the contemporary situation. 
Now this common fund of knowledge which imposes itself as a 
tacit consensus shared by all is largely existentially determined 
— albeit existentially determined on a higher, more abstract 
level. 

The stream of history, then, tends to sift out in the long run 
those contents, patterns, and modes of experience that are of the 
greatest pragmatic value. 

At this point, however, the question arises inevitably: Is the 
pragmatically valuable necessarily also the true? With this ques- 
tion, our problem, originally stated as one concerning the sociology 
of knowledge, is transformed into an epistemological one. The 
epistemological problem, however, cannot be disposed of in the 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 227 

present context. On the other hand, it is out of the question that 
a certain analysis should be stopped short once and for all at the 
most crucial point merely because the recognized domain of a 
different scientific department allegedly begins there (a mode 
of procedure typical of the bureaucratized organization of 
science). 

At this point, I would like at least to suggest how problems of 
these various fields come together in one living context. Having 
allowed ourselves to be carried along by the stream of spontaneous 
doubts, having reached this level of analysis by following the 
inner dialectic of the problem, we should at least take a look to 
inspect the landscape around us. Please allow me to open for a 
moment a window overlooking this landscape of the epistemo- 
logical problems. 

Is the pragmatically valuable also necessarily the true? This 
being an epistemological question, the answer cannot be arrived 
at by the method of the sociology of knowledge. Whereas the 
sociology of knowledge has to do with questions o^fact, epistem- 
ology deals with questions of right. Whereas any finding of the 
sociology of knowledge embodies an assertion of fact which can 
be invalidated by a contradictory factual record, the solution of 
an epistemological problem is always largely dependent on the 
concept of truth presupposed and used in the discussion. The 
sociology of knowledge, however, is in a position to provide a 
peculiar kind of factual information concerning the various truth 
concepts and epistemologies — factual information which itself 
has epistemological implications that no future epistemology may 
overlook. 

Notwithstanding its claim to be the fundamental science and 
the critique of all experience as such, epistemology in fact always 
exists only as a justification of a mode of thought already existing 
or just emerging.! Let a new code of cognition with a new formal 
structure arise, such as, for instance, modern natural science, and 
epistemology will try to explain and justify it. Epistemology 
would like to be taken for a critical science, whereas in fact it 
represents an underpinning and justifying sort of kno\vledge. It 
finds its truth-model externally given, and this partial model will 
serve it as a total pattern of orientation; its concept of truth will 
also be the product of this ex post situation. Viewed historically 
and factually, epistemology stands in the same relationship to any 
given mode of thought as, for example, the philosophy of law 
does to the prevailing legal system. It demands to be recognized 
as an absolute standard, a tribunal, a critique, whereas in fact 

1 Cf. 'Strukturanalyse der Erkenntnistheorie', Kantstudien, Ergdnzungsheft, No. 
57, Berlin, 1922, pp. 72 ff. (To be published in a later volume in this series). 



228 COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 

it is an adventitious structure, a mere system of justification for an 
already existing style of thought. 

From the point of view of the sociology of thought — a discipline 
which always has the entire historical configuration within its 
purview — the main point is that it is not, as one would be tempted 
to assume at first sight, one epistemology that struggles with 
another, but the struggle that always goes on between existing 
modes of thought and cognition which the various theories of 
knowledge only serve to justify. In the historical and social 
framework, theories of knowledge are really only advance posts in 
the struggle between thought-styles. 

What the epistemological implications of these factual findings 
of the sociology of knowledge are, what relevance they have to 
the problem of validity, I do not propose to examine here; I 
simply throw these questions at you, in the hope that you will 
bring them nearer to solution. I am fully aware, of course, that 
in doing so, I am simply unburdening myself of a rather difficult 
problem at your expense. 

This question, however, lies beyond the scope of our original 
topic — the role of competition in the intellectual sphere. The 
discussion of the sociological problems involved reached its 
conclusion with our analysis of the Hegelian dialectics, in the 
course of which we tried to show that the pattern of dialectics 
with its movement between antithesis and synthesis can in part 
be explained by the modern polarization tendency of intellectual 
currents in the stage of concentration. With this conclusion, we 
really return to our starting-point, the concept of a sociology of 
the mind which, so we hope, will elucidate from a new aspect the 
riddles of the dynamics of the mind, the problem of the function 
of doctrinal currents. 

Whatever your own attitude to Hegel and to the sociological 
interpretation of dialectics may be, I hope at least to have 
adumbrated within the limits of this necessarily short and com- 
pressed exposition that the social structure is certainly a co- 
determinant of the concrete shape of existentially-determined 
thought; that, in particular, the various forms of competition 
(including their extreme forms) tend to leave their mark on the 
thought structure with which they are correlated; and finally, 
that in attempting to bring a certain degree of clarity into the 
present intellectual situation (which often confronts one with 
sheer despair, and especially threatens the scientific outlook with 
disaster), we cannot dispense with a sociological viewpoint — in 
this case, with the technique of the sociology of knowledge. 

This does not mean to say that mind and thought are nothing 
but the expression and reflex of various 'locations' in the social 



COMPETITION AS A CULTURAL PHENOMENON 229 

fabric, and that there exist only quantitatively determinable 
functional correlations and no potentiality of 'freedom' grounded 
in mind; it merely means that even within the sphere of the 
intellectual, there are processes amenable to rational analysis, 
and that it would be an ill-advised mysticism which would shroud 
things in romantic obscurity at a point where rational cognition 
is still practicable. Anyone who wants to drag in the irrational 
Avhere the lucidity and acuity of reason still must rule by right 
merely shows that he is afraid to face the mystery at its legitimate 
place. 



CHAPTER VI 

ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE FOR THE SOCIAL 

EDUCATION OF MAN 

THE problem can be formulated in two ways: we can ask 
either how the nature of ambition affects the economic 
system, or how this system, by fostering economic ambition, 
affects human personality. We shall take the latter approach in 
this essay, and we shall thus not be concerned with the significance 
of the striving for economic success in relation to the objectified 
economic sphere, but with the effect of the latter on the develop- 
ment and formation of man. Our topic, then, is the contribution 
economic factors make to the formation of human personality. 

I. THE SOCIAL EDUCATION OF MAN 

The underlying purpose of our investigation is an educational 
one; we are seeking to approach the task of education from a fresh 
angle. 

Education has always had the formation of man as its subject- 
matter. It has always wanted to mould the rising generation 
according to some conscious or unconscious ideal, and always 
sought to control every factor of personality formation. Of the 
typical ways and means of achieving this which have hitherto 
been at its disposal, we propose to mention only those which are 
necessary to put in their proper light the new factors, the new 
approach to education which is now more and more coming into 
its own. 

(i) Educators have always known that in personal contact be- 
tween human beings lay a very profound factor influencing psychic 
development. The personality of teacher, parents, fi:"iends, in 
certain circumstances exercises a more profound effect on a child 

230 



THE SOCIAL EDUCATION OF MAN 231 

than his institutionahzed, cultural surroundings. Personal contact, 
the inspiration exercised by the vital personality of a leader, has 
a directly awakening, rousing effect and cannot be replaced by 
mere objective cultural products. 

(2) Secondly, educators have also recognized the importance of 
the last-named group of educational factors — the objective 
products and achievements of a culture. These are of two kinds: 
{a) specialized areas of knowledge and skills by which human 
action is made more efficient; {b) the moral and aesthetic values 
generally treasured within a culture which, though not directly 
functional or utilitarian, assist in forming attitudes and ideas. 

(3) Finally, educators have been aware of the importance of 
the breeding of automatic, quasi-instinctive habits, the un- 
deviating character of which can often lend more stability to both 
individuals and groups than 'ideas' which have already ceased 
to be convincing, or stringent social demands which, by their 
very stringency, often fail to achieve the intended effect. 

All these ways and means of influencing human beings have 
in common a tendency to confine themselves to possibilities 
afforded by the mutual relations of individuals, and thereby 
remove the task of education from the social and historical sphere, 
making it, so to speak, intimate and personal. It was indeed 
known that education did not take place only in the more or less 
artificially isolated spheres of school or home, in the intimate 
relations between man and man, between 'me' and 'you'. It was 
realized that the decisive processes determining personality 
formation for the most part went on in the public world, vaguely 
referred to as 'Life'. But little or no thought was given to the 
contribution this so-called 'Life' made to personality formation, 
or to examining this contribution in scientific fashion. 

At a pre-sociological stage of thought, 'Life' is regarded 
fatalistically as something vast and incomprehensible, 'irrational'; 
hence when young people carefully reared at home and in school 
finally leave the parental house, they are thought of as being 
abandoned to the storm of life, at the mercy of the incalculable 
elements. No one would maintain that there are no incalculable 
or doubtful elements in 'Life'; no one would deny that there are 
accidents in the stream of events, unique junctures of circumstances 
outside all control. It is impossible to foresee whom we shall meet, 
or what unknown effects a man or an experience may have on us. 
We cannot tell how deeply we may be affected by our experiences 
or to what degree acquaintance with other people may throw us 
back on ourselves. Such a chain of future experiences, unpredic- 
table and therefore incapable of investigation, should not, however, 



232 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

be ill any way identified with the typical recurrent factors in our 
environment which tend to force our mental or spiritual develop- 
ment in a particular direction. Presociological thought does not 
understand that we never have to deal wdth 'life in general', 
in its supposed vague abstractness, but always with a very 
concrete form of social existence in a particular situation. The 
greatest part of our lives is spent in a continual attempt to grapple 
with the array of the overpowering recurrent factors characterizing 
a certain concrete social environment. The nature of these in- 
fluences, their strength, and the direction in which they develop 
or stunt personalities, would be quite capable of investigation and 
description, and could be made more easily amenable to control, 
if they were investigated rationally in the same way as other data 
of human existence have been up to now. 

As long as education fails to observe these factors and take them 
into account, as long as it insists on training 'men in general' 
instead of men suited to a particular social environment, it is 
courting an empty abstractness the result of which can only be 
failure for all those who try to apply the impracticable maxims 
imparted by their education to the concrete world into which 
they must enter. On the other hand, if a person's vitality is power- 
ful enough to withstand these impracticable maxims, he may 
arrive at a compromise whereby he tends increasingly to 'solve' 
the problem they present by paying lip service to them as 'ideals' 
without real motivating force, but ignoring them altogether when 
really important decisions must be made. 

Unsociological educational principles are from the outset 
disposed to produce what Hegel would call the 'unhappy con- 
sciousness' — 'unhappy' because the too elevated, too abstract 
premises inculcated by its artificial education render its owner 
incapable of mastering the conflicts which are the stuflf of real 
life; he tends to feel at home only when dealing with the possible, 
the potential, and to discount all reality as a priori 'bad'. The true 
meaning and function of the 'idea' is to carry reality forward a 
stage beyond itself; but such an artificially cultivated 'idealist 
consciousness' leads on instead to a second 'ideal world', which in 
so far as it has any relation to the concrete historical and social 
present, really only exists to hide from us the unmastered reality 
of the 'primary' world and to conduct us out of the realm of 
genuine idealism into that of its dangerous opposite. Romanticism. 
The plunge from abstract idealism into the crude world of power 
politics, which was such a common feature of the 19th-century 
history of so many nations and social groups, is only a reflection 
and large-scale projection of the process of decay of spurious 
ideas we can observe in everyday life — ideas which are spurious 



THE SOCIAL EDUCATION OF MAN 233 

and doomed to decay precisely because from the first they were 
conceived without any relation to real life. 

However, our emphasis upon the social factors in education 
does not mean that we want to minimize or suppress the factors 
upon which the older type of education was based, such as 
interpersonal contacts, skills, or traditional cultural values. We 
rather want to supplement these older factors, to make them 
more concrete and to add to them the missing third dimension — 
the social dimension. 

For a sociological theory of education, the investigation of social 
factors, the significance of the social environment for education, is 
important in two ways. 

4 Firstly, it is necessary to know as exactly as possible the kind 
of world in which the new generation will be expected to live. 
We want to be able to awaken and cultivate all those capacities 
in the individual which he is likely to need in that environment. 
We must take into account the fact that to a large extent we live 
today in an industrial world and that this world in both its upper 
and lower reaches needs special types of men with special skills 
which they do not acquire naturally in the required form and to 
the necessary extent. The fact must also be borne in mind that 
this type of man will be exposed to certain social challenges, 
attacks, possibilities of conflict in which he must stand his ground 
as an individual, and also prove his capacity to engage in collec- 
tive resistance. The elucidation of the typical influences at work 
in the everyday life of an industrial society will make it easier to 
develop in the individual the necessary skills, and also to cultivate 
in him, in a planned fashion, the attitudes likely to enable him 
to withstand damaging influences. 

The second way in which such an investigation would be 
important, already borders on politics. What we just saw was 
the importance of the knowledge of social factors for training men 
in such a way that they will be most suited to perform the tasks 
that fall to them, thus preventing the rapid social and industrial 
development of our society from making the world unmanageable 
for modern man. That knowledge, however, can have a wider 
function. It is not merely a question of adapting men to a certain 
given level of development, but of producing individuals capable 
of developing the existing form of society beyond itself to a further 
stage. Something has already been said about an 'industrial 
pedagogy' as an instrument of social reform, and it can be 
expected that in an era of social transformation such as that in 
which we find ourselves, men will turn their attention more and 
more consciously to the investigation of those influences at work in 
the everyday life of society which favour the development of a new 



234 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

human type. The task of education, therefore, is not merely to 
develop people adjusted to the present situation, but also people 
who will be in a position to act as agents of social development to 
a further stage. 

The social relations governing everyday life are an important 
subject for research if it is desired to rescue more and more 
factors in the social education of men from the realm of 'accident'. 
A forerunner of research of this type was the so-called 'investi- 
gation of milieux'' , which tried to discover the nature of the 
influence at work in different types of social environment. The 
connection between man's social and economic and his mental 
and spiritual development will be worked out for other sections 
of social life by other branches of sociology, and the joint outcome 
of these investigations will certainly result, in the not-too-distant 
future, in a unified knowledge of the social structure and of the 
extent to which man's spiritual existence can be consciously 
moulded. The investigation oi milieux, however, is oAly a useful 
beginning, since it separates the milieu as a distinct factor and 
problem from its context in the background of dynamic social 
forces. 

What in fact is a milieu? It is a concrete constellation, a unique 
combination of typical causative factors. These latter, of course, 
have to be investigated as such before an individual combination 
formed by them at a given time and place can be accounted for. 
But what is at the bottom of the process in which diflferent 
milieux develop or decay? Obviously the transformation of the 
dynamic social factors which have in fact been the originators of 
the various milieux. For the social world is clearly not merely a 
mosaic-like juxtaposition of different environments. To conceive 
of it in this sense would mean keeping observation at a direct 
intuitive level and ascrit^ng to the outward appearance of the 
successive phases of a process greater importance than to the 
principles determining its development, differentiation, and 
transformation. 

This investigation of milieux on closer inspection proves to 
be merely the advance guard of an increasingly broadly developing 
plan of study, the object of which is to understand life in its social 
as well as its spiritual dimension in terms of the principles of 
development of the different structures working themselves out 
within it. The principles underlying the development of various 
possible forms of experience and thought and their connections 
with those governing social reality, have to be investigated: all 
the decisive questions relate to this central theme. Where one 
starts such an investigation, at what point one decides to begin 
to disentangle the interconnections of events, is arbitrary and a 



WHAT IS 'SUCCESS'? 235 

matter of indifference: what is important is to see that the in- 
vestigation is always pushed to the farthest hmit of the structural 
interconnections, right to the point at which mental and social 
forms are mutually dependent and conditioned. 

If we begin with the economic system and try to observe the 
working of influences radiating from it, we shall certainly be able 
to deal with only one of the possible questions concerning the 
relation between economy and the human person, namely, how 
the economic system affects man. This does not mean, however, 
that it is not also necessary to ask the converse question, i.e. how 
man affects economy, and still more, how he could affect it by 
deliberate action. But precisely because this second question is 
the one for the sake of which the whole investigation is undertaken, 
it cannot be answered until later; before we can tackle it, we must 
examine the first question, that of how the economic system affects 
man. The answer to this question alone can determine the nature 
of the field within which he who desires change must work; and 
unless we believe that man is capable of all things everywhere, 
provided he only has the will, \ve need to know with increasing 
exactitude the nature of his concrete environment and what 
changes it is therefore both meaningful and possible for him to 
try to bring about. ^ As realists, we must make it our first task to 
examine the influence of social life, or, more concretely, of the 
economic system, on man. \Ve want to know through what 
channels of different experiences and different incentives to 
ambition in this sphere, men are formed. The economic system is 
an essential part of social life and a powerful formative force in 
man's environment, operating through the psychic mechanism 
of ambition, of striving for success. 

II. WHAT IS 'success'? 

In order to discuss the nature of ambition — the striving for 
success — we must first know what we mean by 'success'. It is 

1 There are two more reasons why preference should be given to the investi- 
gation of the causal influences exercised by the economy. Max Weber, who is 
usually considered as a defender of the primacy of the 'spiritual', has declared 
himself that, notwithstanding the importance of 'spiritual' factors for the 
investigation of the genesis of capitalism, trends inherent in the economic 
structure of society largely determine the 'spiritual' aspects of the period of 
fully developed capitalism (cf. Religionssoziologie, 1920, vol. I, pp. 55 ff.). For 
our period, then, it is more important to consider the spiritual effects of econ- 
omic causes than vice versa. Furthermore, this line of investigation promises a 
richer scientific yield, because economic factors can be described far more 
objectively and exactly than spiritual factors. While psychic causative factors 
are elusive and hardly amenable to exact scientific analysis, it is quite possible 
to arrive at an objective appraisal of a number of automatic psychological 
results of certain objectively ascertainable changes in the realm of economy. 



236 ox THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

useless, however, merely to describe it ^^■ithout getting down to 
its sociological structure. To describe ho\\' an apple falls from 
a tree is not science. Observation only becomes science when the 
relevant principle, the structure, or the law — in this case, the 
law of gravit>- — is discovered. In the follo%\-ing exposition, ^ve 
shall try to transcend social phenomena as they are observed 
directly, and as they are unquestioningly accepted by historio- 
graphy, and to explore them in terms of underhdng structural 
principles. 

^Ve assume that there is a relationship bet\seen the various 
forms of manifestation of ambition on the one hand, and the 
structure of the social and economic system on the other. Con- 
sequently, we have to analyse the objective elements in the 
phenomenon of 'economic success' before %ve can account for 
changes in the subjective way of experiencing success. To under- 
stand the subjective phenomenon of ambition (stri\-ing for success), 
we must first analyse its objective counterpart, success itself. 
Further, the variety- of forms which ambition can take must be 
understood in terms of the variety of possible kinds of success. 
Only in this way can the essentially Marxist thesis 1 that structural 
changes m the objective world dra\v in their train changes in the 
subjective forms of human experience, be developed and sub- 
stantiated. A structural analysis of 'success' must therefore precede 
a stmctural analysis of 'ambition'. 

'What is 'success'? "What is its structural definition? It is easiest 
to answer this question if ^ve distinguish bet^veen 'success' and 
the closely related phenomenon o'i achievement. ^Vhat have 'success' 
and 'achievement' in common? \Vhat is the generic term which 
embraces them both, and ^vhat is the specific difference between 
them? The generic term embracing both success and achievement 
is realization. That is to say, they have in common that, as against 
potential, imagined, desired, and sought-after results, they are 
both realizations. For instance, as against mankind's centuries-old 
dream of being able to fly, to see into far distances, etc., the 
realization of these possibilities is always an achievement. As 
against a projected symphony, the \vritten one is an achievement. 
Achievements are possible in a whole variety of spheres: tech- 
nolog}'; art; science; economic organization, etc. ^Vhere the 
achievement is a cultural or artistic rather than a material or tech- 
nical one, we usually speak of it as a 'work'. \Vorks and all other 

1 It is some\s-hat strange that Mai-xian literature has neglected specifying 
the channels through which changes in the objective economic structure 
effect spiritual and cultural changes. As to the specific themes of 'ambition' 
and 'success', useful hints can be found in the works of Freud, A. Adler, and 
T. Reik. 



OBJECTR'E AND SUEJECTU'E SUCCESS 237 

achievements alike are realizauons, 'objectifications' within a 
sphere of productive acti\'ityj and the standards by which their 
quahty can be judged are objective standards of that sphere. 
Nevertheless; one can have created a good organization, a ser\'ice- 
able shoe, a competent s\inphony. but these achievements do not 
necessarily carr)' with them success. This example at once brings 
out the essential difference between success and achievement: 
an achievement is a kind of objectification or reaUzation within a 
particular field of productive activity. The existence and \-alidit)' 
of an achievement are independent of the social acceptance and 
fate of its author. 'Success', on the other hand, is a realization in 
the field of social 'inter-indi\idual; relations. 

Xow ^ve must determine more concretely the special form of 
this social realization. The specific form of reaUzation in the inter- 
indi\idual field which is fundamental to success may be designated 
as 'acceptance". It i? important, however, to distinguish two kinds 
of acceptance: [aj acceptance gained by the achievement as 
such objective success;; [b acceptance gained by the author of 
the achie\Tment 'subjective success . 

III. OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE SUCCESS 

Let us begin with objective success. An achievement which 
influences or changes the life ('being') or conduct of men or of 
social gi'oups of men, has objective success in our sense of the term. 
Let us examine a few examples of objective success in its different 
forms. A piece of music is successful. That may mean that it 
affects men in so far as they like it, are stinted by it, have a feeling 
of inner ele\-ation, and perhaps are even altered by having heard 
it. It can also have objective success in that it may affect future 
^\•orks, so that, as a result of it, they are in some ^vay different from 
what they %\"ould othen\ise have been. 

To take another example: men can fly, they can see into the 
far distance. -\nd their beha\iour is completely changed by the 
successful penetration of their daily lives by these discoveries. 
These ne\v possibilities of transport and communication can 
affect men's Ii\"es \-ery radically in many quite different du'ections, 
and it is precisely by the range and nature of its influence that ^ve 
measure the objective success of an achievement. A final example: 
an achie\-ement in the field of technical organization (e.g. 
Taylorism, Fordism, FayoHsm l gains acceptance. Here it is clear 
that the achievement is by its ver}' nature social, and the distinc- 
tion we made above bet^veen "achievement' and "success' becomes 
blurred. \Vhere not only the success but also the achievement 
itself can be realized onlv wiihin a social context, the t\vo become 



238 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

synonymous, or at any rate approximate very closely to each other. 
Thus, the question of success or failure (in both senses of the word: 
'failure to achieve' and 'failure to gain acceptance') is not of 
equal importance for all forms of achievement. In some spheres, 
an achievement depends for its value on the measure of objective 
success accompanying it. On the other hand, the value of many 
achievements is independent of their momentary success. The 
objective success of an army commander, an industrialist, an 
educationalist, or a preacher, is not entirely irrelevant to the 
value of their achievements, whereas the social recognition of 
say a mathematician's work has nothing whatever to do with its 
correctness or otherwise — i.e. with its value as an achievement. It 
is in the nature of those achievements connected directly with 
social life that their objective success is also relevant to their value 
as achievements. For them, success plays a role not unlike that of 
an experiment in the natural sciences — it provides empirical 
verification of hypotheses, or their invalidation, requiring a 
revision of the hypothesis. 

We emphasize this objective form of success because people 
usually tend to mean by the term 'success' nothing but its sub- 
jective side, i.e. the personal success of the author of the achieve- 
ment. In actual fact, however, total success must always have the 
two aspects; both the achievement as such and its author as a 
person must gain social acceptance. It may happen that the 
achievement is recognized, while the individual responsible for it 
is not. In this case, we can still legitimately speak of success. But 
from our point of view it is not permissible to speak of 'success' 
when someone attains high rank or position without any actual 
achievement to his credit. In this case we should speak rather of 
'luck', or, perhaps, of 'undeserved luck', but not of 'success', 
since achievement is implied in our sense of this word. On the 
other hand, since sociological analysis requires flexibility, we must 
not adopt too rigid standards as to whether this or that achieve- 
ment is more or less valuable, or this or that subjective success 
commensurate with the achievement. It is an irrational feature of 
all social systems that they evaluate achievements in different 
spheres differently, and accordingly provide different chances of 
success for different classes of achievement. Whereas there are 
objective criteria for assessing the value of achievements within 
the various fields, the evaluation of a field as a whole is socially 
determined, so that there may attach to the achievements within 
it greater or lesser chances of social success. Whether a shoe is well 
made, or a commercial deal competently put through, may be 
seen by inspecting the shoe or analysing the transaction in 
question. But whether it is the artisan's or the merchant's achieve- 



UNSTABLE AND STABLE FORMS OF SUBJECTIVE SUCCESS 239 

ment which is valued most highly in a particular society, and 
consequently which of the two can provide better chances of 
social success for achievement within its sphere, will depend on the 
prevailing social and economic structure. 

This objective aspect of success, of social recognition, deserves 
attention, inasmuch as we are accustomed to regard any ambition, 
any striving after success as somewhat suspicious, reared as we are 
in a moral atmosphere very largely formed by men of thought 
(religious and philosophical geniuses and so on), that is to say, by 
men whose economic function is restricted to that of consumer. 
We must not forget that social recognition also has this objective 
aspect, and that it is not only a justifiable wish but may even 
constitute a new achievement in itself when a man does all he 
can to get objective success for his work — when he makes every 
effort to see that it influences the life and behaviour of his fellows 
to the highest degree possible. 

In spite of the greater moral value attaching to objective success, 
however, the sociologist turns his attention with increased interest 
to the forms of subjective success, since he knows that the desire 
for subjective success is at the very basis of our social life, and that 
man in society as we know it does not aim directly and simply 
at achievement for its own sake, but arrives there for the most 
part by the devious route of desire for social success. In general 
and on an average, men only attempt to attain something when 
in some way or other they themselves stand to gain in prestige 
from the achievement. We must now turn to the problem of 
subjective success. 

IV. UNSTABLE AND RELATIVELY STABLE FORMS OF SUBJECTIVE 

SUCCESS 

A. We may speak of an unstable form of subjective success 
when the social reward earned by the person responsible for an 
achievement consists in the attainment of some sort of recognition, 
of one or the other kind of 'prestige'. The best-known form of 
prestige is fame. 

B. We may speak of a relatively stabilized form of subjective 
success when the achievement enables its author to secure oppor- 
tunities of exercising social influence, or power to dispose of 
material things. If we express in this complicated fashion the 
simple fact that subjective success may also involve the acquisition 
of money or property ('power of disposing of material things') 
or position ('opportunities of exercising social influence'), it is 
because analysis in terms of 'chances' or 'opportunities', as intro- 
duced by Max Weber, is better suited to bring out the structural 



240 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

meaning of these forms of success than a discussion in terms of 
'property' or 'position'. Money, property, position are after all 
only names to express the fact that a particular individual in a 
particular society may expect to have control over particular 
material things or to make his influence felt in a particular direc- 
tion in society. We speak of a 'relatively' stable success because 
the guarantee that money, property, or position will continue to 
confer certain advantages upon the holder depends on the stability 
of a particular social order which for the moment ensures its 
validity. For everyday purposes the stability of this kind of success 
can be taken for granted as absolute, but for the sociologist who 
must think in wider terms, stability of success can only be relative, 
since it in turn presupposes the stability of a social order. Everyday 
language makes a distinction which corresponds to the distinction 
we made between 'unstable' and 'relatively stable' success; it 
differentiates between 'purely moral' and 'real' success. Common 
language has its own ontology, unconsciously derived from socio- 
logical categories; it distinguishes different degrees of intensity of 
being. Now it may be asked, in which spheres of social life can we 
find 'real' success? Where is this relatively stable success possible? 
If we look round us in society, we shall observe that a relatively 
stable success in the sense of acquiring largely guaranteed oppor- 
tunities of influence and power of disposition over things can be 
found in three spheres, so that we speak accordingly of 

success in terms of power, ^ ^ 

success in economic life, and 
success in a career. 

It is immediately clear that this triple division is not homogeneous. 
The first two can be clearly distinguished, but the latter overlaps 
both. Nevertheless, we are more concerned to point out 
that success of a relatively stable kind is possible in these spheres 
than to make an enumeration which is absolutely neat in a logical 
sense. 

A more fundamental question immediately arises, however. 
Why should success in these spheres be more stable than, for 
instance, fame? What is the structural significance of their 
stability? It lies in the fact that these spheres alone know enforce- 
able interdependent lines of conduct. Once the control of key 
positions with their accompanying opportunities for influencing a 
whole range of activities is acquired, the highly interconnected 
nature of activity in these spheres makes it possible to count to a 

1 'Power' is defined here, in agreement with Max Weber's usage, as influence 
based upon actual or potential compulsion by brute force. Economic influence 
by definition has no admixture of 'power'. 



THE SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND CHANCES OF SUCCESS -^41 

considerable extent on the permanence of these positions and social 
opportunities. 

Anyone who appropriates or has conferred upon him the power 
to command within a 'power' structure can count on a predictable 
human reaction to his commands, since the force behind the power 
structure makes the conduct of those dependent on the centre of 
power homogeneous and controllable. Because in the social 
sphere it is primarily actions which count, and because the motives 
which accompany them in individual circumstances play only 
a minor role, the everyday ontology of which we have already 
spoken experiences this interdependent structure of activity as 
reality, while regarding all the accompanying mental phenomena 
as mere ideology, and, as we have also seen, it speaks with some 
justification of success anchored in that interdependent structure 
of activity as 'real' while dubbing that which rests on 'opinion' and 
'recognition' as 'purely moral'. 

There is a similar interdependent, largely predictable and 
controllable form of conduct in the sphere of market economy. 
In this case, however, force is not the determining factor — it is 
the enlightened self-interest of the individual which gives its 
relative homogeneity and calculability to economic behaviour on 
the market. Thus positions of political and economic power are 
relatively stable. On the other hand, the social grouping to which 
fame approximately relates, is the public (i.e. the pubhc which 
confers the fame). The term 'public', however, indicates a form 
of human association which is not based on vital interests and 
determinable behaviour, but only on opinion, which tends to 
fluctuate the more violently the farther we leave behind the 
traditional forms of social life. Success which consists in fame and 
prestige is increasingly unstable according as we get nearer to the 
historical stage of development at which public opinion is all- 
powerful. 

v. THE SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND CHANCES OF SUCCESS 

I. In general, it can be stated that ambition will be directed 
towards that form of subjective success which appears to afford 
the best guarantee of permanence and security. In other words, 
people tend on the average to seek social recognition and influence 
primarily in those social spheres the structure of which offers the 
best guarantee that people's conduct will be controllable. This 
quite general and formal tendency is only valid, however, on the 
assumption that these spheres are not already in possession of any 
dominant group, since 'dominance' implies that all opportunities 
within the monopolized sphere are secure in their hands. Thus, for 

E.S.K. — 16 



242 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

instance, in societies of a certain structure only certain social 
groups have access to the bureaucratic, military, and other 
'power' positions. The actual structure of society, therefore, has a 
very direct influence on the canalization of ambition. 

2. In this connection, a second fact can be observed. ^ On the 
whole it can be said that in earlier times spheres of interdependent, 
calculable behaviour within which individuals could acquire 
effective positions of power and influence, really only arose in the 
'power' (military and political) sphere. That is why privileged 
strata did their best to secure opportunities of success for themselves 
primarily in this direction. As, however, the economic structure 
of society tended more and more to take on the characteristics 
of a commercial and market economy, ultimately developing 
into capitalism, economic behaviour itself became more and more 
interdependent, calculable, and controllable, so that the oppor- 
tunities of control and influence in this sphere became increasingly 
desirable and the social value of success in this direction rose 
steadily. What we have just described corresponds on the whole to 
Sombart's well-known observation that the earlier phenomenon, 
wealth through power, is more and more supplanted by a new one, 
power through wealth. Formerly, those who wielded power were 
in a position to acquire wealth; now, those who have wealth are 
in a position to secure positions of power. 

3. If the actual form of stable success thus depends to a con- 
siderable extent on the historical and social situation of the 
individual who seeks success, a role of some importance is also 
played by the nature of the achievement itself to which the success 
attaches. For instance, it seems that there is something in the 
nature of cultural achievements in our society that ensures that 
their primary reward is unstable subjective success — i.e. fame — 
and that other supplementary guarantees of objective success 
associated with it are regarded by us as merely accessory. This is 
apparently linked with a further structural shift, namely, that to 
an increasing degree cultural achievement no longer is a function 
of membership of bureaucratic or status groups (as in India, 
China, or in the West in medieval times) with the lay-intelli- 
gentsia as a marginal phenomenon of minor importance, but 
tends to materialize in the medium of a public opinion embracing 
all strata and status groups. This change increases the importance 
of attaining subjective success, since the creator of cultural values 
can no longer count upon automatically accruing emoluments or 
other rewards guaranteed by his status or oflScial position; he 
now must win recognition from a public in which all strata are 
represented (unless he happens to hold down a government job). 

1 Cf, Max Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, pp. 364 if. 



THE SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND CHANCES OF SUCCESS 243 

This may explain the sudden apotheosis of 'fame' during the 
Renaissance, when the scene of cultural achievement was shifted 
from the old hierarchies to the freer sphere of modern literary 
groupings. Since that time, there has been a steady increase in 
the importance of fame dispensed by public opinion, which itself 
came into being only on the gradual dissolution of the hierarchical 
monopolistic position of groups with a special cultural function. 
The importance of public opinion for the stabilization of success 
today goes so far, indeed, that very often even where intellectual 
achievement is connected with an official position (as in the case 
of university teachers or academicians), such a position can be 
attained only via some kind of public success. 

4. The spheres of achievement themselves, as we have pointed 
out, are dependent for their social evaluation on the social 
structure as a whole. The wide differences in the evaluation of 
military achievement in England, or in the Chinese Empire when 
at peace, on the one hand, and in militarist Prussia on the other, 
are examples of this dependence. Or, to take historical rather than 
national differences, there is the very different attitude towards 
achievements in sport today as compared with the preceding 
epoch. It can be seen at first glance how greatly increased are 
opportunities for subjective as well as objective success in this 
field. This growth of opportunity is connected with the fact that 
eminence in sport tends to be more highly valued in a developed 
capitalistic society — understandably, since athletic prowess is more 
important to man living under conditions of modern industrialism. 

5. The rise of the economic sphere to dominance in the modern 
social structure has a number of far-reaching consequences. We 
shall need to discuss only two of them here, affecting directly or 
indirectly the formation of ambition. 

{a) The flow of the most highly valued energies into the 
economic sphere and the greater value of rewards to be had in this 
sphere make for a 'democratization' of society — a democratization 
which is more profound than its political counterpart. Social suc- 
cess in the economic sphere, measurable in money terms, is least 
subject to being monopolized by status groups, particularly so 
long as the nature of the economy is largely competitive rather 
than planned or controlled. Power may be monopolized by status 
groups. When, however, economic success becomes the primary 
object of ambition (provided that competition is relatively free), 
access to chances of success will be free and the rigid stratification 
of society in terms of status will be increasingly undermined. The 
anonymity of money brings about the gradual suppression of the 
old, relatively integrated and personal, type of power structure. 

[b) With the rise of the economic sphere to dominance a new 



Q44 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

form of more or less calculable and controllable conduct emerges. 
Behaviour within the economic structure becomes homogenized, 
to a certain extent calculable and controllable, through the 
working of the well-understood self-interest of individuals. The 
pressure exerted by the economic system, although leaving the 
individual formally free to act according to his own free will (he 
is always free to act without regard to his economic interests), 
nevertheless in the long run does produce a more or less deter- 
minable optimum of 'right' conduct for each situation which 
each individual seeks to ascertain and to achieve. In this way the 
formal freedom of every individual to follow his own self-interest, 
becomes a far more powerful means of 'domestication' or social 
adaptation than force, since force can never penetrate every mesh 
of the complicated social web, whereas the economic sphere — 
in the measure that it becomes dominant — tends, in view of the 
inter-relatedness of all rational lines of conduct, to bring all 
human activities into its orbit, including even actions and reactions 
which have nothing directly to do with economic behaviour at 
all. Money, in spite of the fact that its predominance both pre- 
supposes and entails a type of freedom, is nevertheless much more 
tyrannical, and determines the fate of the individual to a far 
greater extent, than the naked despotism of, say, a feudal prince 
who after all only disposed of political means of compulsion. This 
growing interdependence of economic activity resulting from the 
natural working of individual self-interest, which is rapidly 
becoming a unifying factor of first importance in society, is also 
producing great changes in the social function, and consequently 
also in the actual form, of the intellectual, spiritual, and cultural 
factors in our society. 

A society based on force and power, even when extremely 
thoroughly organized, will still find itself obliged to rely to some 
extent on the support of religious and moral ideas. From a purely 
functional point of view it is clearly impossible ever to control 
more than at best a few key positions in the social structure by 
military and bureaucratic means, and so the uncontrollable 
remainder, the gaps in the power structure, so to speak, the fabric 
of everyday life, must perforce be left to itself, except in so far as 
recourse may be had to ideological means of one sort or another 
(which in the long run tend to become traditionalized and 
habitual) to render these aspects of behaviour which cannot be 
mastered by force more or less homogeneous and stereotyped and 
therewith susceptible to supervision and control. It is those 
societies in which the power structure is too loosely integrated to 
ensure continuously predictable behaviour throughout widely 
ramified social groups, that are forced to cling tightly to religious 



THE SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND CHANCES OF SUCCESS 245 

and similar ideological aids to social control (ignoring, for the 
moment, other tendencies inherent in a pre-capitalistic mentality 
also pressing in this direction). That is why in all previous social 
structures there existed a division of functions between those 
social powers representing, on the one hand, traditional, ideo- 
logical elements (priests), and on the other hand, the powers 
embodying physical force (warriors). As a result of this division 
of functions, the fundamental institutions and principles of the 
predominant beliefs are socially guaranteed, so that their further 
influence left to itself, 'peacefully' permeates the whole social 
fabric, spontaneously ensuring an extended radius of effective 
operation of the prevailing power and the stability of the social 
structure even at those points where the power itself in its naked 
form is not directly present or felt. A society which is primarily 
based on force can never dispense with ideological means 
of control, since force alone can never penetrate the social 
structure in all its ramifications (e.g. private conversation, 
rumour, etc.). 

However, the greater the growth of social interdependence 
accompanying the economic development of capitalism, and the 
stronger the tendency for economic facts to predominate in 
society, the more certain it is that gaps in the structure of pre- 
dictable conduct formerly subject only to indirect control through 
the cultivation of traditionalized ideological responses will become 
more or less determinable and calculable in the sense at least that 
the optimum behaviour serving the rational self-interest of indi- 
viduals in any given situation becomes predictable. 

In a society the structure of which is essentially rational and 
integrated, behaviour will become increasingly predictable even 
in its 'irrational' aspects, since even conduct which is determined, 
say, by panic or irrational motives inherited from former times, 
will be capable of being understood, at least as regards its direc- 
tion, but more especially as regards the most likely point in the 
otherwise rational social structure at which it may develop. The 
greater the extent to which irrationalism tends to be reduced to an 
enclave within an increasingly rational social structure, the more 
calculable and controllable do these irrational elements become. 
The effects of a stock-exchange panic, for instance, are now just 
as calculable as, say, the direction and nature of irrational 
reactions of declassed groups in the process of social struggle. This 
reactionary activity, as we know, quite regularly becomes associ- 
ated with irrational residues of earlier states of consciousness, and 
also tends to appear in situations of a well-defined type in a largely 
predictable form. Thus, at those points (gaps in the power 
structure) at which, hitherto, predictable conduct was only 



246 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

ensured by the development, with the aid of ideology, of tiadi- 
tionalized reactions, economic factors now step in to ensure it 
through the working of individual self-interest. 

This means, however, in rather more lax terminology, that the 
modern economic system (just because economic necessities are 
penetrating to an increasing extent into the very fabric of our 
daily lives) can 'afford' to give the 'ideologists' more freedom than 
has hitherto been possible. 

The economic system is not only far from being liable to im- 
mediate disintegi'ation when its ideologies are undermined, but 
it is even in a certain sense desirable for the elasticity which is 
becoming a condition of its existence, that individuals should 
relinquish reactions which are too rigidly determined by tradition 
and ideological factors, in favour of an ability to adapt themselves 
to the pressure of socializing factors of a more purely economic 
kind. The developed economic system functions better when the 
behaviour necessary within its framework has become emptied of 
any idealistic motivational content. To the degree, therefore, that 
economic rationality permeates social life as a whole, we can 
observe the relaxation of ideological regimentation, documented 
by the fact that consciences are no longer controlled. This is the 
social source of the modern idea of tolerance, i 

In contrast to this eclipse of all ideological elements in economic 
behaviour and in closely related aspects of everyday life, we can 
observe at the same time a growing prominence of the ideological 
factor in politics (so that nearly the entire field of intellectual and 
aesthetic culture comes under the sway of politics). This com- 
pensatory phenomenon can also be explained in terms of the 
modern structure of society. Strictly speaking, only an exclusively 
economic society could be entirely free from all ideological 
elements. We know only too well, however, that the final guaran- 
tee of the stability of our economic system is force; an element of 
'power' is noticeable in economic life in all questions concerning 
the acquisition and holding of property. In our society, there is a 
constant tug-of-war for the possession of positions of not purely 
economic power, especially the key positions; the social struggle, 
therefore, is not only economic in nature. Whereas all behaviour 
which originates from or is motivated solely by economic factors 
tends to be free from ideological elements, all activities serving 
to gain or to combat power have a strongly ideological character. 

The relationship between power and tradition (which is simply 
ideology become habit) characteristic of former societies has given 
way in our society to a relationship between power and the 

1 India shows another type of tolerance. Theological opinion (mata) can be 
completely free because practice {dharma) is rigorously regimented. 



SUCCESS IN A CAREER 247 

economic system. Just as formerly the key positions in the 
traditional-rehgious framework of society were guaranteed by 
force, and the 'domestication' of man took care of the cultural and 
spiritual fields, it is sufficient in the modern social framework to 
guarantee the key positions in the economic sphere only by force; 
everything else is taken care of by the economic automatism 
(which acts, so to speak, as the extencled arm of the power centres). 
Thus, in such an economically dominated society the striving for 
economic success is the motive of action which can most generally 
be counted upon to be operative. Once a man has accepted the 
necessity for economic ambition and strives for success in that 
sphere, his conduct becomes accordingly adaptable and predic- 
table. If the economic structure functions properly, it is possible 
to renounce all control over opinion and 'ideas'. Because in 
economic action, which is the dominant concern of modern society, 
it is possible to dispense in this way with ideological factors, it 
has become a habit of modern man to dismiss all 'religious' and 
'ethical' factors as 'purely ideological'. The derogatory and 
depreciatory nature of this characterization unconsciously reflects 
the ability of the modern social structure to give free rein to 
ideological and cultural factors over a fairly wide field, and in 
fact, it does confer such a freedom in many cases. 1 Someone who 
experiences this without any sociological understanding of the 
P'".icess is inclined to believe that only the interdependent spheres 
& rational reactions can legitimately claim to be 'reality' and he 
therefore tends to regard everything 'mental' or 'intellectual' as 
'accessory' and 'pure ideology'. This is the structural secret of the 
modern ontology which corresponds to capitalism. 

VI. SUCCESS IN A CAREER 

There is a special form of stable success with which we must deal 
more specifically, i.e. the characteristic structure of that chain 
of assured possibilities of success which, taken as an entity, we 
usually term a 'career'. A 'career' is characterized by the fact that 
(a) the power of disposing over things (in the form of income, 
salary, etc.), {b) the opportunities of exerting influence (spheres 

1 The changed evaluation of sexuahty affords a good example of the eclipse 
of the ideological element. Sexual behaviour patterns \vhich appear morally 
indifferent to us carried an enormous charge of moral relevance in earlier 
times. The reason for this is that earlier societies were compelled to impose a 
strict ideological regulation on sexual conduct, the effects of which would 
otherwise have been explosive. In our society, however, changed institutions 
(such as the greater independence of women) largely neutralize those potential 
effects. As social organization becomes more 'rational', the ideological element 
loses weight. 



248 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

of influence, power of command), and {c) the social prestige of the 
success which it affords are all a priori rationed and accrue to the 
individual pursuing the career only by previously established 
degrees. The essence of a career is the rationing or gradual 
distribution of success through a number of stages. 

Whereas in the military, political, or economic sphere the 
individual more or less creates his own place for himself, the 
degrees of success and influence which a man or woman following 
a bureaucratic career will attain are mapped out in advance. 
The fact that the individual makes a place for himself in an 
economic or power structure means that it depends on the indi- 
vidual himself how great a share of the socially available oppor- 
tunities of domination and of economic control over things he will 
appropriate and organize into his own personal status position. 
As far as career is concerned, however, such possibilities exist 
only to a limited extent. Possibilities of exerting influence are 
limited, since jurisdictions are sharply divided among various 
departments; salary schedules keep economic chances within 
limits; chances to gain prestige are defined by pre-existent pro- 
motion schedules which fix, so to speak, the doses of deference the 
individual may lay claim to. Whereas in a career, personality can. 
only make itself felt in so far as it is able to infuse predetermined 
opportunities of influence and power with its own vitality and 
spirit, in the power and economic structures, any position whi^h 
is arrived at can to a much greater extent be moulded by tfiTi 
individual personality. 

Now, to carry this structural analysis of success in career form 
farther, we may ask in what kind of society such an a priori 
rationing and graduation of success is possible and impossible, 
respectively. The answer in principle is that a career in the above 
sense is possible in societies where the future is predictable, where 
the distribution of power is no longer a matter of dispute, and 
where some sort of plan can be made and executed on the basis 
of pre-existent decisions. In a word — where rationalization and 
bureaucratization of tasks is a priori possible, it is also possible to 
achieve a recognized distribution of powers and to create the 
framework for careers in the bureaucratic sense. The term 'career', 
then, is used here exclusively in a bureaucratic sense; to speak of 
Napoleon's 'career' would be at most acceptable as metaphorical 
usage. Any field in which 'careers' in our sense are possible must, 
therefore, constitute a relatively undisturbed and peaceful enclave 
within society as a whole. The real social struggle, then, goes on 
outside the enclave; what we see within, is merely a competitive 
struggle among members of a successful group for the greatest 
share in positions of influence available for distribution on the 



SOCIAL SECTORS SUBJECT TO AND DEVOID OF CONFLICT 249 

basis of rationing schedules. A sphere of society which is capable 
of bureaucratization and control by administration, is thus, in this 
sense, rendered essentially devoid of conflict. Thus, here is an 
essential connection between the fitness of a social sector for 
rational control on the one hand, the absence of conflicts and the 
existence of 'career' bureaucracy, on the other. 



VII. SOCIAL SECTORS SUBJECT TO AND DEVOID OF CONFLICT 

To amplify what we have just said, we must now distinguish 
between sectors in which there is real struggle and those in which 
there is none. We must further distinguish between two funda- 
mental forms of struggle — the struggle for power in which force 
decides, and the economic struggle in which the market decides. 

These two areas of conduct, however, are not clearly separated 
either in space or in time. Nor do some individuals live exclusively 
in the conflict-laden sector and others in the conflict-free one; and 
the activities of one individual are not alternately wholly conflict- 
oriented and wholly peaceful. Sometimes, it is true, we can give 
certain activities such exclusive labels; at other times, however, 
it will be only this or that aspect of one activity which can be 
explained in terms of conflict or absence of conflict. It would also 
be incorrect to imagine that all power-oriented or gain-oriented 
activity takes place exclusively in the conflict-dominated sector of 
social life. When the peasant feeds his cattle, or when the soldier 
performs his military exercises, both are for the moment living 
in a sphere from which conflict has been eliminated, but the long- 
range aims which give their activities meaning somehow point to 
the conflict-laden sector. The peasant will eventually have to 
sell his produce on the market; the soldier must eventually relate 
his activity to a future war. Thus, both in the economic and in the 
political sphere, there are enclaves, fields of activity, long stretches 
of interconnected behaviour which are either naturally, or at 
least artificially and temporarily, devoid of conflict, and it is here 
that bureaucracy and careers are possible. There are economic 
and political bureaucracies, since both economic and political 
structures contain enclaves devoid of conflict. 

It is possible to classify political and economic systems according 
to the relative quantitative and qualitative importance which 
the bureaucratized areas and the remaining areas in which conflict 
predominates respectively possess in them. In the extreme case, 
conflict can permeate every atom of a political or economic 
system. This stage of 'bellum omnium contra omnes' is naturally only 
a hypothetical marginal case, but it is necessary to postulate it in 
order to understand the transitional types leading to the other 



250 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

extreme. Another type confronts us when entire sectors are 
neutraHzed, bureaucratized, and freed from conflict as a result of 
integration and polarization of the contending parties, so that 
conflict occurs only at the few points where these otherwise 
pacified sectors collide with each other. Just as in politics, small 
groups struggle against one another at first, then entire provinces, 
which eventually unite to form large states, so in the economic 
sphere we can trace a similar movement from relatively free 
competition between individuals, through competition between 
groups, to competition in the end between a few really big 
economic powers in the form of trusts. 

This distinction between sectors subject to and devoid of con- 
flict, is of decisive importance for us, because the structure of 
attainable success is quite diflferent in each case, and corresponding 
with each type of success there goes a diflferent type of ambition 
or striving after that success, together with a different type of 
human being and finally a correspondingly diflferent type of 
culture. The various forms of striving for success depend on the 
essence and structure of the success one seeks to attain. The objec- 
tive structure of the success accessible to an individual and 
pursued by him has a far-reaching eflfect on his mental and moral 
attitude. 

So much, then, for the nature of success — not, to be sure, its 
philosophical nature or 'meaning', but its real structure. We must 
now turn to the second part of our task, and try to understand 
the importance of success from the subjective point of view as 
experienced by individuals and to describe its influence on their 
development. Firstly we shall deal with ambition in general and 
then with the specific phenomenon of economic ambition. 

VIII. STRIVING FOR SUCCESS IN GENERAL 

Religious psychology through all the ages has recognized the 
decisive importance of ambition in human life: it has discovered 
the extent to which ambition shapes man's soul, that his spiritual 
build, his deepest nature, can be fundamentally different according 
to whether or not he strives after success. The religious thinkers 
of India already distinguished the so-called Way of Action from 
the Way of Renunciation, Meditation, and Contemplation. The 
same problem occupied Western mystics, and we find, for instance, 
Meister Eckhart in his sermon on Mary and Martha, speaking of 
the Way of Works and the Way of Contemplation and even, 
interestingly enough, contrary to the Biblical interpretation of the 
story, giving Martha, the doer of works, first place. In a similar 
way, we must ask how striving for success influences the structure 



STRIVING FOR SUCCESS IN GENERAL 251 

of an individual's personality and we must undertake the analysis 
even of its profoundest effects, which tend to be ignored when the 
psychology of economic success is alone taken into account. We 
must get at the basic changes in the structure of the individual 
psychology for which the nature of ambition is responsible and 
not restrict ourselves merely to a few fairly simple and direct 
causal sequences. We are of the opinion that ambition, the 
striving for success, is the vital transformer through which the 
influence of the economic system is brought to bear, first on 
the social and psychological habits of the individual, and thereby 
on the nature of his cultural achievements. The process must 
therefore be examined in concreto, and the intermediate links 
deciphered through which the influence of the phenomenon is 
made eflfective. We shall discuss in the following pages certain 
eflfects of ambition, analysing them in terms of a number of 
important categories of psychic reality. 

A. THE INFLUENCE OF AMBITION ON THE INDIVIDUAL'S EX- 
PERIENCE OF TIME AND SELF 

Man's attitude towards time and himself varies according to 
whether he is ambitious or not. The existence of a goal, always 
ahead of the actively ambitious man, brings a certain continuity 
into his life to which he can always cling and towards which he 
can always turn. Even when the occasional inevitable failure 
occurs, and the plan temporarily miscarries, so that disintegration 
and despair threaten, the man with a goal rapidly recovers his 
equilibrium and determination not to be beaten. Thrown back 
on his own resources, he will always search for some way of 
restoring the vanished plan, and with continually renewed energy, 
radically reorganizes his life stage by stage towards the desired 
goal. 

The life of the man who renounces influence and success, on the 
other hand, is unstable and fluctuating. Time for him is dis- 
continuous and spasmodic, he is a prey to fleeting moods and the 
Dossibility of self-abandonment always lurks in the background, 
i his possibility of loss of selfhood is a perpetual torment, unless 
necessity is turned to virtue and the whole way of life is altered 
to meet the situation: to lose the self becomes the goal of life. 
Thus it is that loss of selfhood is the basic feature of the Indian 
conception of Nirvana, and of the mystic Christian aim of merging 
the self with Christ and losing it in Him. 

Whether a man takes one path or the other is for the most 
part decided for him in advance by the tradition in which he lives, 
and which clearly marks one of the two alternatives as preferable 
and superior to the other. Actually, however, behind the decision 



252 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

is a perennial argument between two basic human types. In each 
of us, these two carry on a constant dialogue, though it is but 
seldom brought to the surface of clear consciousness. The active, 
ambitious type upbraids the more passive one for losing his life, 
neglecting his duty to the 'here and now', and shading off 
responsibility for the actual by taking refuge with a Higher 
Reality which commits him to nothing. The passive type retorts 
by maintaining that his opponent is sacrificing his inner 'self 
to the 'world', and that instead of minding his own soul, he con- 
centrates upon purely mundane objectives. 

Which of the two is right does not concern us here. But a glance 
makes this much plain: in both cases there can be genuine and 
spurious solutions; whichever alternative is finally decided on, it 
is always possible that the result in practice will prove to be a mere 
caricature of the real potentialities of the choice. It is possible 
that by persistence and striving, all the possibilities of a personality 
and a situation can be realized, but it is also possible that the world 
will only be discovered in flight from it. Conversely, it may happen 
that the mystic's rejection of the world will lead to emptiness and 
sterility; or that restless striving will in the end produce nothing 
but restlessness. 

B. RELATIONS WITH OTHER SELVES 

Striving for success leads to the discovery of 'the other self — 
not, to be sure, as a real whole, a genuine human entity, but as a 
participant in the struggle, an opponent or rival, to whom one 
has to adjust himself. We see as many different dimensions of 
other selves as we have ways of tackling the outside world. 
Ambition is just such a road leading to the Other. The degree 
to which we can penetrate into the inner secrets of the world 
and of other selves depends on what we want to obtain from them 
and with their help. If what we seek is success, we shall see the 
others, not as selves in their own right, but merely as tools or 
data for calculation. What the other really 'is' can be seen only 
by one who loves him. If we merely seek success, we are only 
interested in knowing how we figure in his plan — just as the other 
cares only about how he figures in our plan. There thus arises a 
peculiar link between individuals, a mutual dovetailing of their 
life plans, whereby each is only for himself, but is nevertheless 
forced to take heed of the other. This negative consideration 
becomes an actual tie, and there emerges a sort of respect for the 
rules and reciprocities of the game which is often stricter than the 
strictest moral compulsion. 

Under such circumstances the soul is revealed in an unusual 
cross-section and the extension of this attitude into the cultural 



STRIVING FOR SUCCESS IN GENERAL 253 

sphere produces a peculiar psychology of self-interest. Stendhal's 
novels, for instance, describe how 'the other self appears to the 
ambitious individual pursuing his career, and how he discovers 
his own and the other's soul as a highly coloured, but nonetheless 
fairly calculable, functioning mechanism. Dostoievsky on the 
other hand in his novels show's what individuals driven by am- 
bition do not see of each other — an aspect of the soul which is 
hidden to the everyday observer and visible only to those who have 
behind them a long religious tradition which inclines them to 
contemplation and introspection and opens up for them the 
profounder problems of spiritual life. 

C. SELF-OBSERVATION 

What men are determined to get out of the world, what they 
want to be in it, does not merely influence their relations with 
their fellows, but also their concept of themselves. The chances 
that the ambitious man will be in a position to understand and 
interpret his inner self are different from those of the man who 
renounces ambition. Self-observation is possible for both, but from 
a different point of view in each case. The ambitious man's self- 
knowledge is not derived from narcissistic self-inspection, or 
mystical contemplation; it is a fruit of his constant pre-occupation 
with the impression he makes, with the effect he achieves. He does 
not want to go into himself, but to get the most out of himself. 
So much, then, for the basic difference of attitude between the 
ambitious man and the one who renounces ambition. 

D. RATIONALIZATION (' VOLLZUGSBEDACHTHEIT' ) 

The difference of attitude of which we have just been speaking, 
produces certain special characteristics of which the most typical 
is that designated by von GottU by the term Vollzugsbedachtheit, 
meaning a minute analysis of work processes as a means to ration- 
alize production. The indi\adual who seeks success is always 
concerned with 'rationalizing' his methods, since he is unwilling 
to leave success or failure to the vagaries of fate — especially at 
the present stage of development of our rationalized existence. 
He is always on the look-out for mistakes in himself, he never lets 
his mind evade the realities of the situation and is always open to 
correction. Thus he always tends to analyse the different factors 
with which he is confronted, and he always strives to achieve both 
mental and practical control of the whole area of work with which 
he is concerned. This results finally in a complete devotion to the 

^ Cf. Gottl-Ottilienfeld, Vom Sinn der Rationalisierung, Jena, 1929; also 
L. Schiicking, Die Familie im Puritanismus, Leipzig-Berlin, 1929. 



254 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

detail of reality which is also a feature of our economic organiza- 
tion and the scientific positivism which goes with it. The tremen- 
dous size of the producing unit in a rd.tionalized economic order 
like ours today means that any increase in productivity comes 
about through the accumulation of small economies: men 
accordingly tend to look for the real structure of the world to an 
increasing extent in the subtle co-ordination of insignificant 
infinitesimal factors. 

E. DISPELLING OF FEELINGS OF ANXIETY 

This tendency toward constant self-correction and willingness 
to adapt oneself to every new situation as it arises, this search for 
perfection in the interests of attaining a given goal, when it 
permeates the whole personality results even in everyday life in 
dispersing step by step the mental darkness in which we otherwise 
live. The man who feels more and more sure of himself, who finds 
his way more and more clearly in social life generally, tends to 
lose the feeling that he is at its mercy, and comes to feel that its 
unpredictability has surrendered itself into his control. Once secure 
in his social sphere, he will feel secure in his relation to 'the 
world'. 'The world', of course, is rather more than a mere sum of 
social interactions; man, however, is inclined to use the pattern of 
orientation which serves him in his social environment as a general 
pattern of orientation in the world. How a man reacted and reacts 
to the world and to himself can be largely guessed from a know- 
ledge of how far he feels himself securely anchored, protected, 
sheltered, or isolated and threatened in his social environment. 
Feelings of anxiety, fear of external threats, and a sense of im- 
potence before the unfathomable depths of one's personality, 
disappear to the degree that one is successful in finding one's way 
about the calculable relations of inner and social life. 

This will help us account for the optimism of a man sure of his 
success, as well as for the pessimism and fatalism of actually 
helpless groups. Naturally, we must be very careful in making 
such observations, and not expect any fixed correlations. Striving 
for success and insistence upon rationalization need not be 
accompanied by ruthlessness in every case. The more the develop- 
ment of human reason causes a growth in self-confidence and 
mastery of life, the greater are the chances that the individual 
will be inclined to take more responsibility on himself, even though 
this inclination must not be exaggerated, and a certain moral 
and practical pressure 'from below' must be assumed. 

The attitude of 'not caring for tomorrow' which is equally 
characteristic of tramps, Bohemians, and mendicant friars, and 
distinguishes them from the man striving for success, conceals a 



STRIVING FOR SUCCESS IN GENERAL 255 

life in which there is Httle clarity and much darkness and im- 
penetrable gloom. Dark is the life of him who cares not for to- 
morrow, because the central area of self remains unrationalized 
and nothing can be expressed in objective terms; the world mani- 
fests itself only through vague, 'atmospheric' impressions. 

The ambitious man, on the other hand, demands that all the 
objective factors which the contemplative person experiences only 
'on the side', either in the form of an aura of incalculable possi- 
bilities or in the form of the opacity of the lived moment, should 
either be removed from view or objectified, and that anxiety be 
dispelled by this observation and objectification. 

The social origins of Freudianism now become clear. Its social 
function is just such a liquidation of anxieties and fears through 
the elimination of uncertainty; it arises from a desire to know one's 
way about even in the soul, to make the darkness which enshrouds 
our daily life to a certain extent manageable. Whether this 
rationalizing analysis of psychic functions really succeeds in 
penetrating human nature, or whether it merely succeeds in 
removing the essential from view, is not the point here. What is 
important is that the area of anxiety does in fact dwindle in the 
process — or that anxiety is at least relegated into those border- 
line areas with which rational action has nothing to do. Perhaps, 
today, death alone remains as the final object which no rational 
activity can penetrate or control. 

F. ADAPTABILITY AND THE POWER OF DECISION 

Insecurity and exaggerated feelings of anxiety arise in the 
passive or feeble personality not merely owing to the genuine 
impenetrability and darkness of all human life, but also in part 
to pathological perplexity in face of things and conditions 
which a rational, practically minded person would find eminently 
manageable. This is why people who are afraid of the 'world' 
and renounce success tend to assume the presence of 'profundities', 
'secrets', and the working of 'fate', where in fact nothing but 
controllable factors enter into play. The active, energetic person 
has nothing but scorn for such attitudes, and rightly so, since the 
mystification of relations which are only obscure by virtue of one's 
own inability to perceive them clearly, merits blame. The hesitant, 
indecisive personality with its incapacity to make decisions and 
to adapt itself to the world will, in the end, develop a complete 
blockage of action, the mechanism of which was recently described 
in psycho-analytical literature. This group includes a type of 
person who destroys his own chances of success. 'There is a con- 
siderable number of persons who have a knack of unconsciously 
placing obstacle after obstacle between their initial conception of 



256 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

a goal, and its actual achievement: thus they either fail to achieve 
it altogether, or do so only too late to be of any use.'i A large 
number of these blockages arise in connection with those forms 
of drive-frustrations which society imposes upon men who lose 
their self-assurance because there is no field in which they could 
prove their worth; through a lack of opportunity to make decisions 
and try out their own capabilities their energy is diverted into 
false channels. A mania for saving and a tendency to substitute 
continuous and unnecessary renunciation for objective and positive 
achievement are the main characteristics of this type of person. 
Today, we find them often in middle rentier groups where the 
changes occurring in their situation are apt to arouse feelings of 
an irrational fate, allowing for no regular connection between 
one's own action and its success, and undermining all opportunity 
and ability to make decisions whereby a man could prove his 
worth. 

G. EXPERIENCE OF REALITY 

It follows from what we have just said that one's fundamental 
approach to reality largely depends on his decision to seek or 
to shun success. Reality for the ambitious man is restricted to 
those fields in which he can become active: that alone is 'real' 
which is somehow related to the success he seeks, or corresponds 
to his goal conception. Thus, of all activities of the soul, he will 
recognize as real only the calculable ones; of objective relationships 
in the world, only the strand within which he seeks success. At one 
moment and in one connection, power alone, at another moment 
and in another connection, economic matters alone constitute 
reality, and everything else appears to be incidental to it. In 
'Bismarckian realism', for instance, only the power structure is 
accepted as 'real', that is to say, that sector of society in which 
the political man primarily lives and seeks success. It is a similar 
situation which gives rise to 'economic realism', an attitude most 
conspicuous in Marxism, but far from being restricted to pro- 
letarian psychology; in fact, it also characterizes the capitalist out- 
look upon the world. 

The 'reality' of the contemplative and passive type of man is 
something diametrically opposed. He is inclined to regard as 
'real' only that which can be divined by intellectual intuition: 
the original form of the vita contemplativa arose from the apathetic 
ecstasy of non-labouring aristocratic groups which assume that 
ultimate reality is grasped only by the soul immersed in passive 
meditation, and accordingly accept only static models as capable 

1 Cf. Th. Reik, 'Erfolg und unbewusste Gewissensangst', in Die psycho- 
analytische Bewegung, vol. I, p, 54. 



THE STRniNG FOR ECONOMIC SUCCESS 257 

of accounting for world processes. This t\-pe tends to look at the 
world through the medium of an unmoved soul, as at something 
static. Only a striving, success-seeking personality will experience 
reality as basically of the nature of a process. 



IX. THE STRIVING FOR ECONOMIC SUCCESS 

After this description of the subjective effects of ambition in 
general, we must now examine the specific form of the influence 
on the structure of human personality of the striving for economic 
success. What we have to say must be presented in t^vo stages. 
First we shall answer the question: 'How does ambition in the 
economic sphere operate in general?' and then, 'What is the nature 
of its influence during different epochs and in different 
societies?' 

It will become clear as we proceed that one can only make 
very abstract statements about the striving for economic success 
in general, since whatever is important about it resides in its 
varying concrete manifestations; what we can say about the 
phenomenon as such boils do^vn to a few formal definitions. The 
reason for this is that all categories of meaning receive their 
'roundness' and substantiality only from the concrete historical 
constellations. Nonetheless, it is also necessary to indicate those 
general characteristics; we shall confine ourselves to a few 
examples. 

A. THE MENSURABILITY OF ECONOMIC SUCCESS 

It is characteristic of economic success that it can be measured, 
in contradistinction to success in the form of power or fame 
which is more or less imponderable and incapable of computation. 
This is true of economic success both in a 'natural' and in a 
'money' economy, except that in the latter, the volume of pro- 
duction as well as the volume of earnings can be expressed in 
terms of money, so that all economic success is measurable as a 
homogeneous quantity. The result of this is that an element of 
calculability is introduced into all phases of conduct in the 
economic sphere: the 'calculating ratio' (as the nineteenth- 
century German Conservative Adam Mliller called it) becomes a 
weapon and tends to assume the even larger role of chief instru- 
ment of orientation in the world. The way in which calculation, 
originally an instrument of achieving success, irradiates every 
sphere of human existence illustrates the fact that the structure 
of human life is always determined by its goal. The nature of the 
goal to a large extent shapes the development of the man whose 
ambitions are fixed upon it. And since die goal, the measure of 

E.S.K. 17 



25B ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

success in the economic sphere, is quantifiable, each preparatory 
step leading up to this goal will also increasingly tend to be viewed 
as something quantifiable. A similar situation exists also in other 
spheres where success is sought, except that outside the economic 
sphere the connection between the nature of the goal and of the 
effort directed toward it on the one hand, and the human nature 
engaged in striving on the other, cannot become so obvious 
because quantification is not possible. Human nature as a whole 
will always be determined by the structure and nature of the 
goal which man sets himself to attain, since out of this goal 
comes the thread which links together the whole chain of his 
conduct. 

Next to the type of success peculiar to the economic sphere is 
that to be achieved through a career. Here indeed the degree of 
success is not computable (ignoring for the moment the measurable 
factor of income which of course exists here too), but it is neverthe- 
less, as we have already seen, a priori subject to 'rationing'. This 
'rationability' is not the same thing as quantifiability (since 
'rationed' promotion can be based on qualitative evaluation), 
but it is, so to speak, on the road toward it. Power and prestige, 
never as such exactly computable, subject only to estimate and 
approximation, are nevertheless graduated in advance in a career, 
owing to the security of tenure and promotion which characterizes 
bureaucratic careers. 

The individual pursuing a career is never exposed to surprises; 
he can count on a degree of success which will await him at each 
point; he has only to see that all potentially disturbing irrational 
elements are eliminated from his life wherever possible and that 
so far as he can manage it, all aspects of his behaviour conform 
to the smooth ways of the official career. Here, too, the nature of 
the social sphere within which a career is possible, with the 
security and susceptibility to rationalization which characterize 
it, makes its mark on the men seeking this kind of success. The 
human type becomes adapted to the demands and structural 
conditions of the social sphere in which its chances of success lie. 
As with other forms of realizing ambition, in the case of a career 
too, the steps leading to the attainment of a goal are largely 
conditioned by the nature of that goal itself. The only difference 
is that in this case the goal shapes the process of striving, not by 
'irradiating' quantifiability, but by its characteristic form of a 
rationed success which may be expected with certainty. Economic 
ambition, with its purely quantitative conception of the success 
sought, tends to lead to complete loss of appreciation of the 
qualitative hie et nunc: on the other hand, the struggle for the 
rationed success accompanying each stage of a career tends to 



THE STRIVING FOR ECONOMIC SUCCESS 259 

eliminate all appreciation of what one might call the imprevu in 
life. Quantitative abstractness tends to replace the question: 
'Who is he?' with an alternative which in America has apparently 
come to predominate — 'How much is he worth?' The caution of 
the man making a career, aiming at security, tends increasingly 
to conceal from him the vital forces operative in life. The striving 
for success by its very nature tends to hide and even to exclude 
altogether from the knowledge of the individual, the creative 
uncertainty, the radically problematic nature of all existence, 
mainly because the planning which inevitably accompanies 
ambition throws a web of social-value judgments over the original 
vital relationships^without allowing the individual to realize that 
by turning his attention exclusively to that self-created artificial ■ 
web he is in fact making it impossible for himself ever to reach 
genuine reality. If, then, one comes to interpret the world in 
exclusively economic terms, he is likely to assume in the end that 
life itself is measurable, or that the degree of security of human 
existence as such is computable. Suddenly, men begin to think 
that no situation can get beyond them, that they can find their 
way about them all. They do not realize that meanwhile they have 
stayed more or less where they were and have made no progress 
in understanding the world. It is never driven home to them that 
they are really only seeing their own self-woven web of carefully 
worked-out and calculable situations in which all men and all 
things have their appointed, unreal, place. 

B. THE NATURE OF BEHAVIOUR IN THE ECONOMIC STRUGGLE 

This quantifying of all values which we have just described in 
connection with economic success, creates a second world, a 
mask-like overlay hiding other values and characters. This 
disguise, this 'reification' of the world has already often been 
observed in the economic sphere and interpreted as an ossification. 
Nevertheless, this is only one aspect of the economic phenomenon. 
It should not be forgotten that struggle is very much to the fore 
in the most important types of economic activity and that price, 
which in a competitive economy is the expression of success, is 
always a competitive price. The nature of behaviour in the 
economic struggle therefore needs to be more carefully deter- 
mined. First of all, we must distinguish it from struggle involving 
violence. Economic struggle is not waged by applying force to 
subdue the enemy, but (always thinking in structural terms) by 
utilizing to the fullest degree all opportunities afforded by a given 
situation, and by taking advantage unhesitatingly of the calculated 
negative chances inherent in the situation of the opponent. The 
procedures involved are not of the nature of man-to-man combat, 



26o ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

but of that of negotiation, getting the better of an adversary by a 
more skilful exploitation of given advantages, doing things at 
just the right moment, taking advantage of trends which one has 
not created oneself He who 'goes under' in the struggle usually 
does so not as a result of direct aggression by an individual 
opponent, but as a result of a dynamism which seems to deliver 
a purely objective verdict. Because of this anonymous nature of 
the struggle, there is something abstract and yet ominous in 
economic life. 

C. SELF-RISK IN THE ECONOMIC STRUGGLE 

The abstract nature of economic struggle lends something 
of the demiurgic to economic life. The 'calculating ratio' which 
in the end reaches over into the irrational, has something 
grandiose and destiny-hke about it. Thus it is the ultimate, 
positive meaning of the economic struggle that, ideally speaking, 
the individual stands to risk himself — everything is staked on the 
game. The abyss is always there — there is always the imminent 
possibility of 'going under'. This is something, however, which 
the career bureaucrat does not experience; once he has attained 
something, he is not likely to lose it again, provided he does not 
'slip up' and lose his status. In the economic sphere, however, 
theoretically speaking, the individual stands at every moment in 
potential danger of losing everything. Herein lies the strain 
but also the formative strength of economic struggle. This danger 
to the self produces a type of individual who 'lives experimentally', 
to use an expression coined by Lorenz von Stein in a discussion 
of Saint-Simon. 1 This absolute risk, at least in the social sphere, 
sharpens all human capabilities, awakens the senses, develops 
adaptability to changing circumstances and fosters intuition. 
But it also stirs up a perpetual state of unrest and kills the sense 
of contemplation. That is why all religions putting contemplation 
above everything else have always proscribed economic ambition. 
Conversely, no group involved in economic struggle has ever 
envisaged the contemplative road to salvation. Confucianism' 
a t>^ical religion of officialdom, did not deprecate wealth already 
accumulated but did denounce all striving for wealth all the more 
vehemently. Economic ambition is the evil element which dis- 
turbs the harmony of the soul, ideal of this bureaucratized 
intelligentsia. 2 

So much, then, for the general characteristics of economic 

1 Cf. Lorenz von Stein, Geschichte der sozialen Bewegung, Munich, 192 1, vol. 
II, p. 141. 

2 Cf. Max Weber, Religionssoziologie, I, Tubingen, 1920, p. 532. 



HISTORICAL FLEXIBILITY OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 261 

ambition and its influence on the structure of human personality 
and way of experiencing Hfe. We have already pointed out, 
however, that economic ambition cannot adequately be described 
and understood in such general terms, and that its most essential 
characteristics only come to light when it is viewed in its concrete 
historical manifestations. It is on examining it more closely in this 
way that it first becomes clear that economic ambition is by no 
means a uniform phenomenon but changes according to the type 
of economic order within which it is found, i.e. according to 
whether the prevailing system is the mercantilist, the laissezfaire, 
or the late capitalist one. Further, it becomes clear that economic 
ambition is also socially differentiated — i.e. that it appears 
differently even in the same economic system according to the 
opportunities for success afforded to the individual by his social 
position. This historical changeability and social differentiation 
of the various forms of economic ambition we shall call its 
flexibility, borrowing the term from the study of milieux. Once it is 
established that economic ambition is flexible, it will be the task 
of economic and social psychology to show a similar flexibility 
in the psychological make-up of the corresponding human 
types. 



X. HISTORICAL FLEXIBILITY OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

It is impossible to present the whole wealth of historical 
variations of economic ambition and its effects within the compass 
of this essay. We must confine ourselves to one example of this 
historical flexibility; taking a particular profession as an example, 
we shall observe how ambition within it develops in connection 
with changes in its function, and produces quite different types 
of men at different stages in its history. We have chosen as our 
example the business leader or manager, and we shall try to 
show how shifts in the overall economic structure change the 
patterns of economic influence and thereby modify the person- 
alities of those who can exert economic influence. Since this 
evolutionary process is quite well known, it will be sufficient to 
give a few rough outlines. We shall begin with the period of the 
guilds, when the artisan combined the functions of manager, 
inventor, and worker which were not yet differentiated, much less 
hierarchically superimposed upon one another, and when achieve- 
ment and success as a result were almost synonymous, inasmuch 
as profit in se had not yet become a separate goal. In such a situa- 
tion, something of what has been called 'gratification by work' 
iWerkseligkeit) was possible. Work was experienced as a meaning- 
ful process, and this is why one could still 'glory' in a piece of 



262 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

work well done. The theory is certainly right which maintains 
that the worker has been deprived of the meaning of his work, 
of the planning, combining, and inventing functions, by the 
inventor, just in the same way as the capitalist had deprived him 
of the ownership of means of production, and the economic 
system as a whole had deprived him of his security by giving him 
his 'freedom'. It is clear that where the area of economic struggle 
is carefully regulated by guilds, the individual master can have 
no dynamic ambitions. His motto is not yet that of the modern 
entrepreneur — 'more, and still more'. Without much risk, with a 
prescribed standard of achievement (subsistence), abstract 
revenue, the calculation of capital yields was quite foreign to the 
so-called entrepreneur of this time. This static kind of economic 
ambition, where the worker still glories in his product and where 
the goal is merely the maintenance of a certain level of security, 
produces a meditative, contemplative mentality; spiritual values 
are what matters, and in the extreme case, there is always the 
possibility of a quietist mysticism. 

It is clear that the head of an enterprise in the mercantilist system 
is a very different type of man from his medieval counterpart. 
Within his business, he is already an organizer, rather than a 
producer; within society at large, and especially in his dealings 
with the authorities, he is an official. He knows neither risk nor 
any of the other virtues of the fighter. Above him stands the in- 
spector. The talents of the higher official — diplomacy, perspicuity, 
and skill in negotiation — guarantee him chances of security of a 
bureaucratic kind. Bureaucratic security is that second type of 
ambition which is compatible with a contemplative kind of culture. 
But it is evident at this point that quietistic contemplativeness and 
pride of work of the artisan has entirely different roots from the 
self-assurance of the bureaucrat. 

Free competition first produces a type of entrepreneur whose 
ambition and general mental attitudes are radically different from 
this. Let us begin with a few observations on his changed function 
under the new circumstances of free competition. Basically, he 
has the considerable initial task of floating an undertaking; 
creating the economic framework within which to work. Even 
where this is already accomplished and an existing enterprise 
is taken over, the chief still has characteristic functions of his 
own — accumulating capital, maximizing profits, overcoming 
competition. 

Corresponding to these new functions there arises a new type 
of mentality. Ambition of a very special kind arises, thoroughly 
dynamic from first to last, so that anyone who is possessed of it 
is always striving beyond his latest achievements to still further 



HISTORICAL FLEXIBILITY OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 263 

goals. His personality will display the combative virtues necessary 
for the economic struggle: daring; realism; ability to analyse the 
psychology of an opponent; never flagging interest in exploring 
the interconnectedness of things; constant anticipation of further 
possibilities, pointing beyond any achievement; living in the 
future rather than in the present moment; refusal to be satisfied 
with whatever is; insistence upon future chances awaiting 
realization as more important than anything already accom- 
plished; in short, an inability to linger over the present and a 
perpetual effort to get ahead of oneself. 

Besides these combative virtues, combative vices also develop: 
ruthlessness; greed; self-aggrandizement; the complete denial of 
all values of a contemplative nature. To be sure, dynamism also 
exists in the power sphere, and the knight, too, is a non-contem- 
plative character, compared with the monk. But the man whose 
ambition is power does not pursue his goal with the same con- 
tinuity and the same single-mindedness corroding every other 
interest; his activity is more fluctuating and sporadic, awaiting 
chances when they offer themselves, and devoid of any systematic 
character. 

The entrepreneurial mentality we have described is most fully 
developed in the period of nascent industrialism, when everything 
has to be begun from scratch: the undertaking itself and the 
economic framework within which it can work. Nothing is there 
to regulate the task — no inhibitions, no rules of the game such as 
exist in a very compelling form in a more developed economy. 
These pioneers were correctly described as pirates who used every 
means at their disposal to aggrandize themselves. They com- 
pletely identified their person and their fortune with the enterprise 
they headed; their impulses to produce, to possess and to dominate 
mutually strengthened each other. In such founders of industrial 
empires as Rockefeller or Vanderbilt the old violence and un- 
scrupulousness of fifteenth- and sixteenth-century pioneers like 
Jacques Coeur and the Fuggers lives again. 

The latest period is that in which integration and concentration 
of concerns and capital takes place — the period when many small 
independent producers are squeezed out of business, and as a 
result many former decision-makers are transformed into function- 
aries directed and controlled by a higher central authority. From 
a structural point of view, this means a transformation of the 
nature of ambition from a bourgeois, individualist, dynamic type, 
into a bureaucratic one — a transformation affecting a large 
number of individuals who are certainly not negligible from the 
point of view of the whole, both because they are many, and 
because their fate is typical. 



264 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

Together with the progressive ehmination of independent 
producers, we can observe a concerted regulation of market con- 
ditions, with regard to commodities as well as labour. This 
transformation of the labour market increasingly changes the 
worker, slowly it may be, from a free agent with a non- 
guaranteed existence into a kind of petty official. Both major 
tendencies signify a narrowing of the field of struggle and a 
growth in the rationalized, bureaucratized area of society. Any 
decision on the part of the individual for himself is gradually 
eliminated by the increasingly rationalized field in which he 
operates; what was hitherto obtainable only by means of struggle 
now becomes a question of administration. Individual decisions 
are only possible now in the extreme or marginal case. The 
economic and social sphere of operations approximates more and 
more closely to a space containing a few large pyramid-like 
bodies struggling with each other, but in such a way that the 
whole heat of the combat is concentrated solely at the apexes of 
the pyramids whose broad bases are increasingly pacified, devoid 
of conflict, and amenable to administration. 

It might be supposed that the energies of combat become the 
more intense, the more they are concentrated in these apexes. 
This is indeed partly true, but there are other tendencies working 
against it. The dynamic intensity of the 'apex' is modified by a 
division of functions, and we know that such a division also leads 
to a differentiation in the forms of the striving for success. The 
division of functions consists in this; in the so-called 'heroic 
period' of capitalism, the functions of capitalist and manager were 
vested in a single man. The capitalist was also the leader, the 
actual administrator of the concern. As a result of the increase in 
the amount of capital necessary to float an undertaking, it became 
more and more impossible for the individual or even his family to 
put up the necessary money. Thus, there was a transition from the 
family concern to the modern joint stock company. This process, 
which is especially highly developed in America now, is visibly 
making headway in Germany too. In the first place, this means 
that the former capitalist automatically becomes a rentier and 
the function of leadership falls to the manager. The capitalist 
relegated to the position of rentier with an increasingly standard- 
ized income is the most glaring example of how a one-time 
dynamic striving for success can be transformed into static con- 
templativity. What we observe, then, is first a splitting up and 
then a reversal of a pattern of ambition which once charac- 
terized the entrepreneur who was also a capitalist. In the 'mere 
capitalist', the mentality of the captain of industry who primarily 
sought power he could derive from wealth is first pushed into the 



HISTORICAL FLEXIBILITY OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 265 

background and then replaced by a stable pattern of ambition. 
With this analysis the problem arises as to which forms of the 
contemplative consciousness are compatible with the way of life 
of a rentier. 

There still remains the manager, however. (In certain cases, 
his function still can be exercised by the owner of capital in 
person.) His pattern of ambition, at any rate, is likely to display 
the dynamic element in a pure and intensified form. In fact, he is 
primarily interested in widening the field of influence of himself 
and his concern; his functions remain those of initiative, leadership, 
and management; instead of the virtues of combat, however, he 
will need to have, above all, organizing ability. Since this dynamic 
of leadership and management is not directly coupled with an 
increase in personal property (at least not to the same extent as 
previously), it tends to become impersonal. The manager works 
with great vigour and combativity, but the rationale of his labour 
tends to be the enterprise as such — the enterprise which becomes 
a fetish. The impersonal nature of the dynamism is also illustrated 
by the fact that leadership is really no longer in the hands of one 
person, but is dispersed in various boards. 

All this is important also because it shows how changes of 
function, and the splitting up of economic functions, can contribute 
to a de-personalizing and hence to a moralizing of economic 
ambition and incentive. If we follow this idea through in all its 
implications, we shall reach the conclusion that, by modifying 
the scope of economic activity and creating new functions, the 
economic process can modify the motives shaping human be- 
haviour. 

The example we have just analysed was designed to show 
concretely how the nature of a man's ambition, and in the last 
resort, how man himself as a human type, is changed when his 
occupation (in this case, that of the manager), his field of activity, 
and his function in society undergo a transformation. In order, 
however, to make this illustration yield everything it contains 
of value for our analysis, we must try to elucidate the structural 
principle which is expressed by these changes. It is of fundamental 
importance for the understanding of the mental changes we have 
been observing to know whether the individual or occupation in 
question is included at a given point of time in that area of 
society which is dominated by conflict, or in that bureaucratized 
area in which calm prevails. Furthermore, we observed cor- 
relations between different types of ambition and various possible 
types of culture which we have so far been able only partially to 
elucidate. It is now our task to provide at least a sketch of a more 
complete picture on this basis. 



266 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

XI. TYPES OF ambition; types of personality; types of 

CULTURE 

The categories with the aid of which we have so far correlated 
the development of mental attitudes and types of social culture 
have been the static and the dynamic. We saw that there are 
certain groups of social functions and occupations which by the 
nature of the ambition they foster tend inevitably to produce a 
static mentality and a contemplative culture. There emerged 
automatically from the foregoing analysis three static types of 
occupation — the artisan, the rentier, and the bureaucrat. Simi- 
larly, there automatically emerged three dynamic types: {a) the 
power-seeking type, {b) the seeker of economic success in free 
competition, and {c) the seeker of economic success in imperfect 
competition. Naturally, there is no suggestion that this classification 
covers even approximately the multiplicity of possible types. We 
are merely trying to collect and compare the types which suggest 
themselves as a result of the previous survey. An exact analysis 
would indeed involve working out step by step the concrete 
differences between the kind of contemplation and passivity 
characteristic of the rentier, the bureaucrat, and the artisan. We 
shall, however, confine ourselves to the analysis — and a brief 
one at that — of one of these types, and shall choose as our example 
the bureaucratic mentality, which is likely to be of greater im- 
portance in the future than the other two. It is important to 
analyse the form of ambition peculiar to the bureaucrat, and the 
static psychology corresponding to it, among other things for the 
reason that we are witnessing a progressive bureaucratization of 
the world which seems to be the fate in store for us. It is irrelevant 
whether we like or dislike it; the only issue is how we can make the 
best of this situation, and which components of it we can develop 
and counteract respectively. 

We must first analyse the specific nature of the security within 
which the bureaucrat's ambition naturally develops (his career). 
We shall do this by comparing it with the security and static 
peculiar to the artisan's way of life. The bureaucrat is distin- 
guished from the artisan, firstly, in that he is involved in personal 
relationships of dependence, however impersonal and institu- 
tionalized they may be, whereas relative independence is perhaps 
the chief characteristic of the artisan's status. Relations of personal 
dependence mould the life of the man who wants to make his 
way in a bureaucratic organization to such a degree that we 
probably have to accept the judgment that there is no means by 
which men can be more thoroughly dominated than by the 
bureaucratic subordination inherent in a career. Not only will the 
a priori grading of functions and powers make his reactions uniform 



TYPES OF AMBITION; PERSONALITY; CULTURE 267 

and calculable, but even his mental make-up, the attitude he is 
expected to adopt, will be partly consciously and partly un- 
consciously regulated. Just this, however, constitutes an essential 
difference between the rationality of conduct as we find it in the 
bureaucratic and the economic sphere. Where the chief concern 
is to make money, the psychological and ethical motives actuating 
the individual are negligible within certain limits. What counts 
is only whether the contracting party reacts in a calculable 
fashion, and how. In the rational conduct of the bureaucrat, 
however, his motives and attitudes are by no means as immaterial 
as that. In stable times, when one particular group tends to 
predominate in society, one may even speak of the 'obligatory' 
attitude expected of officials. But when a number of different 
attitudes conflict in society, and political control is vested in 
changing coalitions, officialdom also will reflect the various 
attitudes the times allow for — although in a blunted and indirect 
fashion, since the bureaucrat takes pride in merely carrying out 
the decision of others and obeying no political impulse in exer- 
cising his official functions. The attitude 'expected of the bureau- 
crat will, then, tend to result in a mutual cancelling-out and a 
neutralization of the different political aims in society, and in a 
specifically 'objective' attitude being substituted for these various 
aims.i 

In fact, just as we are obliged to work out the negative aspects 
and dangers of the bureaucratic way of life, we should give its 
possibilities their due, and point out that there is hardly any other 
sphere where success depends to such an extent on a characteristic 
objectivity as it does in the whole apparatus of bureaucracy. 
We must not overlook, however, the fact that this 'non-party' 
attitude, this forced objectivity, often turns subtly into partisan- 
ship. In such cases, the bureaucrat hides behind a formal correct- 
ness and disregards justice. Nevertheless, within any bureau- 
cratized sphere there exists a certain inherent trend towards the 

1 A specifically bureaucratic morality may thus arise — a phenomenon 
which may in part be explained by the fact that the officialdom was the only 
social force which subsisted intact throughout the social turmoil of the last 
two centuries. It is a sociological law that the relatively self-contained nature 
and the continuity of a group are the best guarantee of the stability of its 
norms. In France, the bureaucratic apparatus remained relatively unchanged 
from the Ancien Regime on, through the revolution, the Napoleonic era, the 
Restoration, the reign of Louis Philippe, the Second Republic, the Second 
Empire, the Third Republic; one and the same official often served three or 
four regimes. During the last 30 years, on the other hand, one has been able 
to observe the infiltration of the spirit of the social movement into the official- 
dom. Outside forces bolster, and interfere with, the autonomy of the closed 
corporation. Cf. the chapter on the bureaucrat in Paul Louis, Les types sociaux 
chez Balzac et ^ola. 



268 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

suppression of arbitrariness; this is why at critical moments, when 
arbitrariness and lawlessness threaten to gain the upper hand, 
bureaucracy may be well fitted to be the point of crystallization 
around which a new 'order' develops. It may be added that those 
relatively detached patterns of thought and action, as well as 
those ways of life, which can most easily be transmitted from one 
historical and social order to the other, tend to become anchored 
in those compartments of social reality which are relatively devoid 
of conflict. We have already referred to the relatively easy way in 
which a bureaucracy can be transferred from the power-structure 
of one society to another; and even if such a transference does not 
usually take place completely without friction, bureaucracies as 
a rule are more easily transferable than many other groups. The 
secret of this greater adaptability lies in the fact that as a result 
of bureaucratization and the grading of power which accompanies 
it, key positions in this sphere acquire an enormous importance. As 
a result of the fact that the structure is so built up in advance that 
political initiative is vested exclusively in the political leader, so 
that everyone else is from the start denied any influence on the 
really vital policy decisions, there develops a constant, one might 
say an incorrigible, habit of accommodation to circumstances 
which leaves indelible traces on the official mind. To what abuses 
this leads we need not discuss at length — it is enough briefly to 
mention the banal fact of experience that the unexpended energy 
of the normal will-power under such circumstances will tend to 
find outlets for itself in any direction left open to it. The type of 
official, submissive to his superiors and a bully to his inferiors, 
venting all his yearning for power on them, is only too familiar. 
Whereas the artisan, to return to our original example, has a 
normal outlet for all his energies in a variety of normal relation- 
ships and in his work, so that he is much less frequently 
'tyrannical', the predominance of relations of personal dependence 
in the bureaucrat's life produces, so to speak, a dialectical twist 
in his soul, now tending to exaggerate the tension resulting from 
those relations of dependence, now seeking to overcome it. 

One of the means of overcoming the tensions inherent in the 
structure of a career is the proper use of 'leisure'. The existence 
of 'spare time' which is also fully regulated, brings the official 
nearer to the position of the worker. The true artisan and the true 
tradesman and the true scholar do not really have 'spare time' as 
such. The man who is working on his own, responsible only to 
himself, cannot restrict his eflforts at achievement or success within 
certain time-limits. Nor can he make the all-important distinction 
between what is 'public' and 'private'. The fact that the bureaucrat 
is in a position to draw a sharp line between his 'official' and 



TYPES OF AMBITION; PERSONALITY; CULTURE 269 

'private' activity, between office time and spare time, has its 
advantages and disadvantages. One advantage is clearly the 
variety thus introduced into his life. He in no way attempts to fit 
in his official with his leisure activities. He lives in two worlds, 
and he must therefore, so to speak, have t\vo souls. But this is in 
no sense true of the artisan, who does indeed take rest from his 
work, but whose activities fit clearly and organically into the life 
around him, as long as the economic sector of crafts is left intact 
by social developments. He rests — but he does not enter a new 
world in his spare-time. 

This diflference, moreover, is not merely connected with the 
problem of leisure, but also with the content and object of one's 
work. From this point of view, too, we can see how the structure 
of the bureaucrat's existence parallels that of the worker as against 
that of the artisan. Worker and official alike are given tasks that 
are parts of a whole which for the most part they are not in a 
position to see as such. The lower the individual official stands in 
the bureaucratic hierarchy, the more nearly his occupational 
destiny resembles the worker's. The meaninglessness of one's tasks, 1 
however, produces certain mental structures which may — 
dialectically again — either make for more meaninglessness in the 
private sector of one's life (e.g. in the form of senseless sitting 
around and drinking in bars), or overcome meaninglessness by 
some compensatory activity. 

Herewith we arrive at an important point in our discussion. 
This dualism, public activity — private activity, working time — 
leisure time, official associations — free social connections, means 
that both the worker and the bureaucrat tend to develop a men- 
tality adapted to what is very nearly a dual existence. Their 
minds have to be so constructed that they can seek compensation 
in the one world for all that the other fails to give them. In any 
case, men always tend to seek what their daily existence fails to 
give them in another world of wishful dreams. In the case of 
the bureaucrat, however, this dualism can concretely materialize 
in his actual life; what he is deprived of in his official existence, 
he tries to obtain in his leisure time. Thus, he need not solve his 
problem by carrying the impotence characterizing his occu- 
pational activity over into his private sphere, and spend his time 

1 This is an important aspect of the existence of white-collar employees; 
of. Hans Speier, 'Die AngesteUten', Magazin der Wirtschaft, No. 13, March 28, 
1930, and the brilliant analysis in Siegfried Kracauer, Die AngesteUten, Frank- 
furt, 1930. Speier quotes an observation of the American psychologist Elliot 
D. Smith to the effect that machine work is best done in a state of half-awake 
dreaming. A need for this state develops, and is satisfied by the motion picture. 
Cf. also Emil Lederer and Jacob Marschak, 'Der neue Mittelstand', in Grund- 
riss der Sozialokonomik, Sect. IX, vol. I. 



270 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

idling around in bars; he may demand from his leisure what his 
working hours do not give him. The most profound exponent of the 
bureaucratic mind, the chronicler of petty bourgeois life, Charles 
Louis Philippe, said of love: ''L amour, c'est tout ce que Von n'a 
pas' — and this applies equally to the second world created for 
himself by this superior type of bureaucrat. This alternative way 
— the way of compensating for one's daily life in one's leisure 
time — is the major cultural possibihty inherent in the contem- 
plative existence of the bureaucrat. We all know moving characters 
who, whether industrial workers or officials, make their leisure 
their life. Beginning with such things as a simple hobby, there is 
an ascending scale leading to more and more refined and valuable 
solutions of this problem of existence. There are two essentially 
different ways of cultivating the time left after work. One is to 
intensify everything that is only satisfied in a fragmentary or 
rudimentary fashion in one's daily work; a deepened knowledge of 
the subject of one's work, in order to achieve better results, or to 
get a wider view of it. The specialist tries to be an even better 
specialist, and to overcome the compartmentalization which 
modern methods of work create, by trying to give his specialized 
knowledge a wider foundation. The other way is an explicitly 
compensatory one. The individual will try to obtain in his leisure 
that which he otherwise has not got; if his work is rudimentary 
as to its meaning, a wider meaning will be supplied by studying, 
by living on a higher plane, by travelling, by getting to know more 
people, by widening one's horizon. 

A great deal more could be said along these lines. However, 
we must confine ourselves to indicating the crux of the connection 
between apparently unconnected problems. We must show the 
structural problem which may give us a hint as to how to solve 
the problems which modern economic life creates for our culture. 
In this chain of problems the question of the possible utilization 
and moulding of bureaucratic contemplativity is of decisive 
importance. We have already seen clearly how many influences go 
to make this type of man and this type of life more and more 
prevalent. It is beside the point, therefore, whether we approve 
of this development or not. The social process itself has raised the 
question for us. There is no point in complaining over the all-too- 
frequently shabby and meagre existence of the bureaucrat: the 
job here and now is to pay the closest attention to the positive 
possibilities of this way of life. If one examines it more closely, 
one can see that even here powerful changes have already taken 
place by themselves. When we think of officials today we no longer 
picture to ourselves the old-time dusty clerk in the provincial 
town: the development of a political and economic bureaucracy 



FLEXIBILITY OF AMBITION ACCORDING TO STATUS 271 

and of a special kind of managerial bureaucracy, particularly in 
the so-called 'mixed', or semi-public undertakings, afford a 
widely varied field which can be not only explored but consciously 
moulded and developed along the lines of the positive possi- 
bilities it offers, to an extent which at least has never in the past 
been possible. 



XII. FLEXIBILITY OF AMBITION ACCORDING TO SOCIAL DIFFER- 
ENTIATION 

After this excursion into the region of the cultural effects of 
different forms of ambition, let us return to our main subject. 
In the preceding pages, we have tried to show the flexibility of 
economic ambition in the temporal dimension of history, using 
concrete examples; what remains for us to do is to observe this 
flexibility in the dimension of social differentiation. We must 
show that striving for success even witlwi the same economic system, 
and in the same historical period, is variable and elastic. One 
example must suffice here. By showing the flexibility of the typical 
incentives to economic achievement influencing individuals, we 
shall demonstrate that work effort is motivated differently at 
different points in the social structure. 

To the sociologically untrained, it might appear that the motives 
for doing work or seeking economic success are an entirely sub- 
jective matter and can be ascertained only by exploring the 
intimate structure of every individual's personality. As against 
this, however, even a superficial glance will show that the motives 
which may impel people to do work or seek economic rewards are 
largely typical, and that their incidence shows a marked social 
differentiation. 

That is to say that whether a man works, why he works, 
whether he is ambitious, and, if so, what kind of success he seeks, 
is to a very large extent pre-determined by that customary range 
of motives and incentives associated with his own social group. 
Carrying the matter still farther, we may proceed from the merely 
empirical observation of the influence exerted upon the individual 
by his milieu to a genuinely structural problem, and ask why it 
is that certain motives are associated with this particular social 
group and others with another. We shall find that an examination 
of the position of the various social groups in society and the 
process of production will give us a fairly comprehensive clue to 
the kind of incentives likely to characterize average behaviour in 
them. 

Max Weberi once attempted to collect all the incentives and 
1 Cf. Wirtschaft imd Gesellschaft, p. 60. 



272 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

impulses leading to economic activity. An adequate classification 
of these impulses turned out to be possible only on the basis of 
social differentiation. Max Weber came to the conclusion that 
they varied in an exchange economy according to the place of 
the subject in the process of production. From this point of view 
he distinguished three groups of subject: 

1. The propertyless. 

2. Educationally privileged persons (whose cultural equipment 
in the last resort is based on wealth) . 

3. Persons having a direct chance of drawing business profits. 

We shall take this classification as our point of departure, but 
shall feel free to modify it somewhat and to make it more concrete. 
We shall distinguish the following main groups, corresponding to 
the categories distinguished by Max Weber: 

{a) The wage-earners. 

(b) The so-called professional intelligentsia — officials or tech- 
nicians. 

{c) Individuals engaged in business either as capitalist owners 
or as managers. 

To this social classification of economic subjects there corre- 
sponds (as Max Weber had seen) a classification of typical economic 
motives. The first category works, either because the individual 
is unwilling to expose himself and his family to the risk of being 
unprovided for, or because, under the suggestive influence of 
his group, he consciously or unconsciously adopts the idea of 
work as the only acceptable content of life. 

In a word — economic activity in the first group is motivated, 
either by the pressure of want, or by more or less automatic 
habit. 

As far as the second category is concerned — the professional 
intelligentsia — work is primarily motivated by the desire for 
recognition; differential economic advantages, however, must not 
be overlooked as a powerful supplementary motive. 

It is clear already from the juxtaposition of these two cases that, 
according to his place in the social hierarchy, an individual may 
either be shut off from certain 'higher' goals of ambition, or be 
exempt from certain primitive motivations. The under-privileged 
'free' worker can never know incentives which are only accessible 
to the professional man — the desire to gain recognition through 
important achievements. Conversely, however, this means that 
at the same time the educationally privileged individual relies 
practically exclusively on desire of recognition as an incentive 
to work (because in his circle it is the usual one) and he feels 



FLEXIBILITY OF AMBITION ACCORDING TO STATUS 273 

himself most unfortunate if circumstances force him to work solely 
for subsistence rather than for recognition. A further fact con- 
nected with these structural variations we have been discussing 
is that in particular the unskilled worker is never in a position to 
'glory' in his work. This is due in the first place to the fact that 
the tasks falling to him become increasingly devoid of meaning, 
and that his circumstances are such that he never can have any 
other motive than flight before the need which is dogging him, 
A further consequence of this is that in so far as his moral fibre 
remains intact, and he retains a need for some feeling of dignity, 
he will try to satisfy this outside the sphere of work, say in politics. 
Were we to pursue this still farther, it would be easy to indicate 
what peculiar laws govern the shift of value emphasis from one 
sphere to another. We should discover the reasons why in one 
period and in one social group it is work, and in another politics, 
and so on, which receive the highest valuation; and it could be 
shown in each case that if one sphere of human activity is emptied 
of meaning as a result of changes in the social structure, man will 
seek to transfer the freed energies elsewhere. 

We must now turn to the third group — the capitalists and 
managers, and the motives peculiar to them. Besides the desire for 
enhanced possibilities of consumption in this case there is also a 
desire for power which needs satisfaction. This group (particularly 
the managers) are also activated by the particular motive of 
proving their worth through their financial success. 

In a word, the man whose principal motive is to gain recog- 
nition, will as a rule be found in a different social 'location' from 
the man whose principal motive is to gain power. The engineer, 
the official, tend on the whole to seek recognition; the industrial 
manager, to seek power. In these cases, too, any desires which 
cannot be satisfied in the working lives of these people must either 
disappear altogether or find satisfaction in some other sphere. 
Only the manager can satisfy his desire for power in the economic 
sphere; below a certain position under present conditions people's 
instincts for power cannot be allowed to develop. Once, however, 
a position is reached where power is a legitimate goal, the forces 
of the environment will favour its attainment. The potential is 
brought to fruition. 

It need not be developed in detail that it is by no means 
unessential whether a person is primarily motivated by necessity, 
by the desire of recognition, or by the desire to attain power, 
since overall personality is decisively shaped by the motives 
which most frequently determine behaviour. Since one's economic 
activity is by no means a part-time affair, the motives associated 
with it always mould and shape one's personality. Hence, one's 

E.S.K. — 18 



274 ON THE NATURE OF ECONOMIC AMBITION 

occupation, or rather, the place one occupies in the social frame- 
work, always becomes a more or less important ingredient of one's 
character. Not only is the range of vision of an individual depend- 
ent on his sphere of economic activity, and on the nature of his 
ambitions, but also the general way in which he will deal with 
things as they confront him in other spheres of life. 

If we now ask in conclusion what we can learn from an exact 
knowledge of the various stages of flexibility of ambition, we can 
say: 

A. The range of influence of economic and social change is to 
an increasing extent capable of exact determination. The general 
thesis that the economic system forms men, that society moulds 
us, is increasingly confirmed with every concrete analysis along 
these lines. We need such detailed analyses in order to show in 
detail how the transformation going on in the economic sphere 
affects personality formation, if no outside interference is allowed 
for. We can hope to influence this process by deliberate action 
only after having observed its undisturbed flow and thus gained 
insight into its structure. We must know the basic trend of the 
forces at work, their susceptibility to modification, their degrees 
of flexibility, before we can accomplish all that could be done in 
the way of de-personalizing and moralizing average motivations. 
In the course of our investigations we have noted examples which 
show that an ethically less desirable motive can be replaced by a 
more desirable one. The economic process itself has in many 
situations seen to it that managers were actuated by the impartial 
motive of bringing about what is economically desirable i?i se, 
rather than by desire for power. A theory of economic education 
will more and more have to take into account for what scope of 
activity we have to educate this or that pupil. This -presupposes 
sociological analysis; indeed, neither sociological nor pedagogi- 
cal pursuits are likely to be meaningful, unless they are combined. 
Abstract norms, unrelated to the real world, will not help us. 
We need norms which correspond to psychological possibilities 
in a concrete situation. Norms unrelated to the concrete life 
situation only substitute 'edification' for education, and modern 
man rightly detests nothing so much as this 'edification', which, 
while blocking the way to any pragmatic application, allows for 
nothing but barren, gratuitous emotional states. The major 
moral advance of modern times consists precisely in the fact that 
we no longer want such norms, 

B. If up to now we have tended to formulate the problem as 
though the economic system formed men but men could not form 
the economic system, it was merely because we wished for once 



FLEXIBILITY OF AMBITION ACCORDING TO STATUS 275 

to work out all implications of one aspect of the connection 
between the two. But we most certainly did not want to suggest 
that men must accept fatalistically everything that follows 
'inevitably' from the economic structure. On the contrary, we 
are of the opinion that under certain circumstances men can also 
form their economic and social systems. This, however, cannot 
be achieved by becoming hypnotized by the doctrine of the 
abstract freedom of men 'as such', but only by exact observation 
of the field of activity within which freedom can be exercised. 
For this, we must have exact knowledge of the world in which 
man lives now, at this present day. 

If real men today are powerfully attracted by the modern 
study of social determination of mental and moral life, it is 
not because they have to convince themselves at any cost that all 
their behaviour is objectively determined, so that they may 
excuse their deficiencies and let the anonymous social process 
decide about everything, instead of assuming the responsibility 
for a decision themselves. On the contrary, the deeper motive 
behind this study is the desire to descend into the laboratory 
where these hidden forces are at work, to gain an insight into the 
pattern of their interplay, and thus become able, at the bidding 
of an autonomous will, to master them and put them at the 
service of an educational work in personality formation which 
one can pursue consciously in full freedom and responsibility. 



CHAPTER VII 

THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

I. HOW THE PROBLEM STANDS AT THE MOMENT 
A. THE POSITIVIST FORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM 

THE first task of the sociologist is to review the general state 
of investigation into his problem. All too often it falls to 
his lot to deal with stray problems to which all the sciences 
in turn have made their individual contribution without anyone 
having ever paid any attention to the continuity of the investi- 
gation as a whole. We shall need to do more, however, than give 
a mere survey of past contributions to the problem of generations. 
We must try to give a critical evaluation of the present stage of 
discussion (in Part One); this will help us in our own analysis of 
the problem (in Part Two). 

I Two approaches to the problem have been worked out in the 
past: a 'positivist' and a 'romantic-historical' one. These two 
schools represent two antagonistic types of attitudes towards 
reality, and the different ways in which they approach the prob- 
' lem reflect this contrast of basic attitudes. The methodical ideal 
of the Positivists consisted in reducing their problems to quanti- 
tative terms; they sought a quantitative formulation of factors 
ultimately determining human existence. The second school 
adopted a qualitative approach, firmly eschewing the clear day- 
light of mathematics, and introverting the whole problem. 

To begin with the former. The Positivist is attracted by the 
problem of generations because it gives him the feeling that here 
he has achieved contact with some of the ultimate factors of 
human existence as such. There is life and death; a definite, 
measurable span of life; generation follows generation at regular 
intervals. Here, thinks the Positivist, is the framework of human 
destiny in comprehensible, even measurable form. All other data 
are conditioned within the process of life itself: they are only the 
expression of particular relationships. They can disappear, and 
, their disappearance means only the loss of one of many possible 

276 



HOW THE PROBLEM STANDS AT THE MOMENT 277 

forms of historical being. But if the ultimate human relationships 
are changed, the existence of man as we have come to understand 
it must cease altogether — culture, creativeness, tradition must all 
disappear, or must at least appear in a totally different light. 

Hume actually experimented with the idea of a modification 
of such ultimate data. Suppose, he said, the type of succession 
of human generations to be completely altered to resemble that of 
a butterfly or caterpillar, so that the older generation disappears 
at one stroke and the new one is born all at once. Further, 
suppose man to be of such a high degree of mental development 
as to be capable of choosing rationally the form of government 
most suitable for himself (This, of course, was the main problem - 
of Hume's time.) These conditions given, he said, it would be 
both possible and proper for each generation, without reference 
to the ways of its ancestors, to choose afresh its own particular 
form of state. Only because mankind is as it is — generation follow- 
ing generation in a continuous stream, so that whenever one 
person dies off, another is born to replace him — do we find it 
necessary to preserve the continuity of our forms of government. 
Hume thus translates the principle of political continuity into-\ 
terms of the biological continuity of generations. -^ 

Comte^ too toyed with a similar idea: he tried to elucidate the 
nature and tempo of progress (the central problem of his time) 
by assuming a change in the basic data of the succession of 
generations and of the average length of life. If the average span 
of life of every individual were either shortened or lengthened, 
he said, the tempo of progress would also change. To lengthen 
the life-span of the individual would mean slowing up the tempo 
of progress, whereas to reduce the present duration of life by half 
or a quarter would correspondingly accelerate the tempo, because 
the restrictive, conservative, 'go-slow' influence of the older 
generation would operate for a longer time, should they live 
longer, and for a shorter time, should they disappear more 
quickly. 

An excessively retarded pace was harmful, but there was also 
danger that too great an acceleration might result in shallowness, 
the potentialities of life never being really exhausted. Without 
wishing to imply that our world is the best of all possible worlds, 
Comte nevertheless thought that our span of life and the average 
generation period of 30 years were necessary correlatives of our 
organism, and that further, the slow progress of mankind was 
directly related to this organic limitation. The tempo of progress 
and the presence of conservative as well as reforming forces in 

1 For these quotations from Hume and Comte, cf. Mentre (19), pp. 179 f. 
and 66 ff. 



278 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

society are thus directly attributed to biological factors. This is, 
indeed, how the problem looks in broad daylight. Everything is 
almost mathematically clear: everything is capable of analysis 
into its constituent elements, the constructive imagination of the 
thinker celebrates its triumph; by freely combining the available 
data, he has succeeded in grasping the ultimate, constant elements 
of human existence, and the secret of History lies almost fully 
revealed before us. 

The rationalism of positivism is a direct continuation of classical 
rationalism, and it shows the French mind at work in its own 
domain. In fact, the important contributors to the problem are 
for the most part French. Comte, Cournot, J. Dromel, Mentre, 
and others outside Germany are positivists or, at any rate, have 
come under their influence. Ferrari, the Italian, and O. Lorenz, 
the Austrian historian, all worked at a time when the positivist 
wave encompassed all Europe. ^ 

Their formulations of the problem had something in common. 
They all were anxious to find a general law to express the rhythm 
of historical development, based on the biological law of the limited 
life-span of man and the overlap of new and old generations. 
The aim was to understand the changing patterns of intellectual 
and social currents directly in biological terms, to construct the 
curve of the progress of the human species in terms of its vital 
substructure. In the process, everything, so far as possible, was 
simplified: a schematic psychology provided that the parents 
should always be a conservative force. 

Presented in this light, the history of ideas appears reduced to a 
chronological table. The core of the problem, after this simpli- 
fication, appears to be to find the average period of time taken for 
the older generation to be superseded by the new in public life, 
and principally, to find the natural starting-point in history from 
which to reckon a new period. The duration of a generation is very 
variously estimated — many assessing it at 15 years (e.g. Dromel), 
but most taking it to mean 30 years, on the ground that during 
the first 30 years of life people are still learning, that individual 
creativeness on an average begins only at that age, and that at 60 
a man quits public fife. 2 Even more difficult is it to find the natural 

1 The exact titles of all works referred to in this essay can be found in the 
bibliography at the end of the book. 

2 Riimelin's attempt seems to be the most scientific; he tried to assess genera- 
tion periods in various nations, using purely statistical methods and ignoring 
all problems related to intellectual history. The two decisive factors entering 
into his calculations were the average age of marriage among men, and half 
the average period of marital fertility. The generation-period is obtained as 
the sum of these two quantities (which vary as between both social groups and 
countries). Germany was computed at 36^, and France at 34^ years. 



HOW THE PROBLEM STANDS AT THE MOMENT 279 

beginning of the generation series, because birth and death in 
society as a whole follow continuously one upon the other, and 
full intervals exist only in the individual family where there is a 
definite period before children attain marriageable age. 

This constitutes the core of this approach to the problem: the 
rest represents mere applications of the principle to concrete 
instances found in history. But the analytical mind remains at 
work all the time, and brings to light many important rami- 
fications of the problem while working on the historical material. 

Mentrei in particular, who first reviewed the problem historic- 
ally, placed the whole formulation on a more solid basis. 2 He 
takes up the analysis of the problem of generations in the human 
family after a discussion of the same phenomenon among animals, 
based on the work of Espinas {'Les Societes Animales\ Paris, 
1877). It is only after having investigated these elementary aspects 
of the problem that he takes up more complex aspects, such as the 
question of social and intellectual generations. 

We also must take into account a refinement of the problem 
due to Mentre which flows from the distinction he makes (in 
common with Levy-Bruhl) between 'institutions' and ^series 
litres'. A rhythm in the sequence of generations is far more 
apparent in the realm of the 'series' — free human groupings such 
as salons and literary circles — than in the realm of the institutions 
which for the most part lay down a lasting pattern of behaviour, 
either by prescriptions or by the organization of collective under- 
takings, thus preventing the new generation from showing its 
originality. An essential part of his work is concerned with the 
question as to whether there is what he calls a pre-eminent sphere in 
history (for example, politics, science, law, art, economics, etc.) 
which determines all others. He comes to the conclusion that there 
is no such dominant sphere imposing its own rhythm of develop- 
ment upon the others, since all alike are embedded in the general 
stream of history,^ although the aesthetic sphere is perhaps the 
most appropriate to reflect overall changes of mental climate. An 
analysis of the history of this sphere in France since the i6th 
century led him to the view that essential changes had come about 
at intervals of 30 years. 

Mentre's book is useful as the first comprehensive survey of 
the problem, although in reality it yields little, considering its 
volume, and fails to probe deeply enough or to formulate the 

1 Cf. No. 19 in the Bibliography. 

2 We shall discuss here in detail only those students of the problem of 
generations whose contributions appeared after the publication of Mentre's 
work. 

3 Mentre (19), p. 298. 



28o THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

problem in systematic terms. That the French recently became 
so interested in the problem of change from one generation to 
another was largely due to the fact that they witnessed the sudden 
eclipse of liberal cosmopolitanism as a result of the arrival of a 
nationalistically-minded young generation. The change of 
generations appeared as an immediately given datum and also as 
a problem extending far outside the academic field, a problem 
whose impact upon real life could be observed in concrete fashion, 
for example, by issuing questionnaires, i 

Although Mentre occasionally makes remarks which point 
beyond a purely quantitative approach, we may consider him as 
a positivist whose treatment of the problem of generations thus 
far represents the last word of the school on this subject. 

We must now turn our attention to the alternative romantic- 
historical approach, 

B. THE ROMANTIC-HISTORICAL FORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM 

We find ourselves in a quite different atmosphere if we turn to 
Germany and trace the development of the problem there. It 
would be difficult to find better proof of the thesis that ways of 
formulating problems and modes of thought diflfer from country 
to country and from epoch to epoch, depending on dominant 
political trends, than the contrasting solutions offered to our 
problem in the various countries at different times. It is true 
that Rumelin, who attacked the problem from the statistical 
viewpoint, and O. Lorenz, who used genealogical research data 
as his starting-point, both remained faithful to the positivist spirit 
of their epoch. But the whole problem of generations took on a 
specifically 'German' character when Dilthey tackled it. All the 
traditions and impulses which once inspired the romantic- 
historical school were revived in Dilthey's work; in Dilthey we 
witness the sudden re-emergence, in revised form, of problems 
and categories which in their original, romantic-historicist 
setting helped found the social and historical sciences in Germany. 

In Germany and France, the predominating trends of thought 
in the last epoch emerged closely related with their respective 
historical and political structures. 

In France a positivist type of thought, deriving directly from 
the tradition of the Enlightenment, prevailed. It tended to 
dominate not merely the natural but also the cultural sciences. It 
not only inspired progressive and oppositional groups, but even 
those professing Conservatism and traditionalism. In Germany, 

1 Cf. also the books of Agathon (i), Bainville (3), Ageorges (2), Valois (30). 
E. R. Curtius (7), and Platz (25), also always take into consideration the factor 
of generations. 



HOW THE PROBLEM STANDS AT THE MOMENT 281 

on the other hand, the position was just the reverse — the romantic 
and historical schools supported by a strong conservative impulse 
always held sway. Only the natural sciences were able to develop 
in the positivist tradition: the cultural sciences were based 
entirely on the romantic-historical attitude, and positivism gained 
ground only sporadically, in so far as from time to time it was 
sponsored by oppositional groups. 

Although the antithesis must not be exaggerated, it is never- 
theless true that it provided rallying points in the struggle which 
was conducted round practically every logical category; and the 
problem of generations itself constituted merely one stage in the 
development of this much wider campaign. Unless we put this 
antithesis between French positivism and German romanticism 
into its wider context, we cannot hope to understand it in relation 
to the narrower problem of generations. 

For the liberal positivist type, especially at home, as stated,] 
in France, the problem of generations serves above all as evidence/ 
in favour of its unilinear conception of progress. ' 

This type of thought, arising out of modern liberal impulses, 
from the outset adopted a mechanistic, externalised concept of 
time, and attempted to use it as an objective measure of unihnear 
progress by virtue of its expressibility in quantitative terms. 
Even the succession of generations was considered as something 
which articulated rather than broke the unilinear continuity 
of time. The most important thing about generations from this 
point was that they constituted one of the essential driving forces 
of progress. 

It is this concept of progress, on the other hand, that is 
challenged by the romantic and historicist German mind which, 
relying on data furnished by a conservative technique of observa- 
tion, points to the problem of generations precisely as evidence 
against the concept of unilinear development in history.! The| 
problem of generations is seen here as the problem of the existence 
of an interior time that cannot be measured but only e xperie nced 
in purely qualitative terms. 

The relative novelty of Dilthey's work consists in just this 
distinction which he made between the qualitative and quanti- 
tative concept of time. Dilthey is interested in the problem of 
generations primarily because, as he puts it, the adoption of the 
'generation' as a temporal unit of the history of intellectual 
evolution makes it possible to replace such purely external units 

1 For the conservative concept of time, cf. 'Conservative Thought', to be 
published in a later volume. 

For a repudiation of the concept of progress as used to sum up historical 
development, cf. for example, Pinder (23), p. 138. 



282 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

as hours, months, years, decades, etc., by a concept of measure 
operating from within {eine von innen abmessende Vorstellung) . The 
use of generations as units makes it possible to appraise intellectual 
movements by an intuitive process of re-enactment, l 

The second conclusion to which Dilthey comes in connection 
with the phenomenon of generations is that not merely is the 
succession of one after another important, but also that their 
co-existence is of more than mere chronological significance. The 
same dominant influences deriving from the prevailing intel- 
lectual, social, and political circumstances are experienced by 
contemporary individuals, both in their early, formative, and in 
their later years. They are contemporaries, they constitute one- 
% generation, just because they are subject to common influences. "^^ 
iThis idea that, from the point of view of the history of ideas, 
''contemporaneity means a state of being subjected to similar 
[influences rather than a mere chronological datum, shifts the 
- I discussion from a plane on which it risked degenerating into a kind 
[ of arithmetical mysticism to the sphere of interior time which can 
' be grasped by intuitive understanding. 

\ Thus, a problem open to quantitative, mathematical treatment 
\ only is replaced by a qualitative one, centred about the notion 

);, of something which is not quantifiable, but capable only of being 
i experienced. The time-interval separating generations becomes 
subjectively experienceable time; and contemporaneity becomes 
a subjective condition of having been submitted to the same 
determining influences. 

From here it is only one step to the phenomenological position 
of Heidegger, who gives a very profound interpretation of this 
qualitative relationship — for him, the very stuflf and substance of 
Fate. 'Fate is not the sum of individual destinies, any more than 
togetherness can be understood as a mere appearing together 
of several subjects. Togetherness in the same world, and the 
consequent preparedness for a distinct set of possibilities, deter- 
mines the direction of individual destinies in advance. The power 
/ of Fate is then unleashed in the peaceful intercourse and the 
conflict of social life. The inescapable fate of living in and with 
one's generation completes the full drama of individual human 
existence.'^ 

The qualitativ e concept of tim e upon which, as we have seen, 
Dilthey's approach was based,~also underlies the formulation 
given the problem by the art historian Finder. 3 Dilthey with a 
happy restraint is never led to develop any but genuine 

1 Cf. Dilthey (8), pp. 36 ff. 

2 Heidegger (12), pp. 384 ff. 

3 Pinder (23), cf. especially Ch. 7. 



HOW THE PROBLEM STANDS AT THE MOMENT 283 

possibilities opened up by the romantic-qualitative approach. As a 
matter of fact, he was able to learn also from positivism. Pinder, 
on the other hand, becomes thoroughly enmeshed in all the 
confusions of romanticism. He gives many deep insights, but does 
not know how to avoid the natural excesses of romanticism. ^The 
non-contemporaneity of the contemporaneous' is what interests Pinder 
most in relation to generations. Different generations live at the 
same time. But since experienced time is the only real time, they 
must all in fact be living in qualitatively quite different subjective 
eras. 'Everyone lives with people of the same and of different 
ages, with a variety of possibilities of experience facing them all 
alike. But for each the "same time" is a different time — that is, it 
represents a different period of his self , which he can only share with 
people of his own age.'i 

Every moment of time is therefore in reality more than a point- ' 
like event — it is a temporal volume having more than one dimen- 
sion, because it is always experienced by several generations at 
various stages of development. 2 To quote a musical simile 
employed by Pinder: the thinking of each epoch is polyphonous. 
At any given point in time we must always sort out the individual 
voices of the various generations, each attaining that point in time 
in its own way. 

A further idea suggested by Pinder is that each generation 
builds up an 'entelechy' of its own by which means alone it can 
really become a qualitative unity. Although Dilthey believed the 
inner unity of a generation to exist in the community of deter- 
mining influences of an intellectual and social kind, the link of 
contemporaneity as such did not assume a purely qualitative form 
in his analysis. Heidegger tried to remedy this with his concept 
of 'fate' as the primary factor producing unity; Pinder, then, 
in the tradition of modern art history, suggested the concept of 
'entelechy'. 

According to him, the entelechy of a generation is the expression 
of the unity of its 'inner aim' — of its inborn way of experiencing 
life and the world. View^ed within the tradition of German art 
history, this concept of 'entelechy' represents the transfer of 
Riegl's concept of the 'art moti\e' (Kunstwollen)^ from the phenom- 
enon of unity of artistic styles to that of the unity of generations, 
in the same way as the concept of the 'art motive' itself resulted 
from the rejuvenation and fructification, under the influence of 
positivism, of the morphological tendency already inherent in the 
historicist concept of the 'Spirit of a people' [Volksgeist) . 

1 Pinder (23), p. 21. Pinder's italics. -Ibid., p. 20. 

3 Cf. K. Mannheim, 'On the Interpretation of Weltamchauung,^ pp. 33 ff in 
this volume. 



284 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

The concept of a ^spirit of the age' (Zeitgeist) with which one had 
hitherto principally worked, now turns out to be— to take another 
of Finder's favourite^ musical analogies — an accidental chord, an 
apparent harmony, produced by the vertical coincidence of notes 
which in fact owe a primary horizontal allegiance to the different 
parts (i.e. the generation-entelechies) of a fugue. The generation- 
entelechies thus serve to destroy the purely temporal concepts of 
an epoch over-emphasized in the past (e.g. Spirit of the age or 
epoch) . The epoch as a unit has no homogeneous driving impulse, 
no homogeneous principle of form — no entelechy. Its unity con- 
sists at most in the related nature of the means which the period 
makes available for the fulfilment of the different historical tasks 
of the generations living in it. Periods have their characteristic 
colour — 'such colours do in fact exist, but somewhat as the 
colour-tone of a varnish through which one can look at the many 
colours of the different generations and age-groups'. ^ 

Although this denial of the existence of an entelechy peculiar 
to each epoch means that epochs can no longer serve as units in 
historical analysis and that the concept of Zeitgeist becomes in- 
applicable and relativized, other terms customarily used as units 
in the history of ideas are left valid. According to Pinder, in 
addition to entelechies of generations, there exist entelechies of 
art, language, and style; entelechies of nations and tribes — 
even an entelechy of Europe; and finally, entelechies of the 
individuals themselves. 

What then, according to Pinder, constitutes the historical 
process? The interplay of constant and transient factors. The 
constant factors are civilization, nation, tribe, family, individu- 
ality, and type; the transient factors are the entelechies already 
mentioned. 'It is maintained that growth is more important than 
experience ('influences', 'relationships'). It is maintained that the 
life of art, as seen by the historian, consists in the interactions of 
determining entelechies, born of mysterious processes of nature, with 
the equally essential frictions, influences, and relations experienced 
in the actual development of these entelechies. ^ What is immedi- 
ately striking here is that the social factor is not even alluded to in 
this enumeration of determining factors. 

This romantic tendency in Germany completely obscured the 
fact that between the natural or physical and the mental 
spheres there is a level of existence at which social forces operate. 
Either a completely spiritualistic attitude is maintained and 
everything is deduced from entelechies (the existence of which, 

1 Pinder (24), p. 98. 

2 Pinder, pp. 159 ff. 

■5 Pinder, op, cif., p. 154, Pinder's italics. 



HOW THE PROBLEM STANDS AT THE MOMENT 285 

however, is not to be denied), or there is a feehng of obhgation to 
introduce some element of reahsm, and then some crude biological 
data like race and generation (which, again, must be admitted 
to exist) are counted upon to produce cultural facts by a 'mysteri- 
ous natural process'. Undoubtedly, there are mysteries in the 
world in any case, but we should use them as explanatory 
principles in their proper place, rather than at points where it is 
still perfectly possible to understand the agglomeration of forces 
in terms of social processes. Intellectual and cultural history is 
surely shaped, among other things, by social relations in which 
men get originally confronted with each other, by groups within 
which they find mutual stimulus, where concrete struggle produces 
entelechies and thereby also influences and to a large extent 
shapes art, religion, and so on. Perhaps it would also be fruitful 
to ask ourselves whether society in fact can produce nothing more 
than 'influences' and 'relationships', or whether, on the contrary, 
social factors also possess a certain creative energy, a formative 
power, a social entelechy of their own. Is it not perhaps possible 
that this energy, arising from the interplay of social forces, 
constitutes the link between the other entelechies of art, style, 
generation, etc., which would otherwise only accidentally cross 
paths or come together? If one refuses to look at this matter from' 
this point of view, and assumes a direct relationship between the 
spiritual and the vital without any sociological and historical 
factors mediating between them, he will be too easily tempted to 
conclude that especially productive generations are the 'chance 
products of nature',1 and 'the problem of the times of birth will 
point towards the far more difficult and mysterious one of the 
times of death'. 2 How much more sober, how much more in tune 
with the genuine impulses of research, is the following sentence 
in which Dilthey, so to speak, disposed of such speculations in 
advance: 'For the time being, the most natural assumption would 
appear to be that on the whole, both the degree and the distri- 
bution of ability are the same for each generation, the level of 
efl^iciency within the national society being constant, so that two 
other groups of conditions^ would explain both the distribution 
and the intensity of achievement.' 

Valuable, even a stroke of genius, is Finder's idea of the 
'non-contemporaneity of the contemporaneous', as well as his 
concept of entelechies — both the result of the romantic-historical 
approach and both undoubtedly unattainable by positivism. But 

1 Pinder, op. cit., p. 30. 

2 Ibid., p. 60. 

3 That is, the 'cultural situation' and 'social and political conditions'. 
Dilthey (8), p. 38. 



286 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

his procedure becomes dangerously inimical to the scientific spirit 
where he chooses to make use of the method of analogy. This mode 
of thought, which actually derives from speculations about the 
philosophy of nature current during the Renaissance, was revived 
and blown up to grotesque proportions by the Romantics; it is 
used currently by Pinder whenever he jries to work out a biological 
world-rhythm. His ultimate aim alsoiTTo establish rneasurable 
ihtervals in history (although somewhat more flexibly than usual), 
and to use this magical formula of generations in order to discover 
birth cycles exercising a decisive influence on history. Joel,i 
otherwise an eminent scholar, indulges in even more unwarranted 
constructions in this field. His latest publication on the secular 
rhythm in history reminds the reader immediately of the romantic 
speculations. 

It is a complete misconception to suppose, as do most investi- 
gators, that a real problem of generations exists only in so far as a 
rhythm of generations, recurring at unchanging intervals, can 
be established. Even if it proved impossible to establish such 
intervals, the problem of generations would nevertheless remain a 
fruitful and important field of research. 

We do not yet know — perhaps there is a secular rhythm at work 
in history, and perhaps it will one day be discovered. But we mii§t 
definitely repudiate any attempt to find it through imaginative 
speculations, particularly when this speculation — whether bio- 
logical or spiritual in its character — is simply used as a pretext 
for avoiding research into the nearer and more transparent fabric 
of social processes and their influence on the phenomenon of 
generations. Any biological rhythm must work itself out through 
the medium of social events: and if this important group of 
formative factors is left unexamined, and everything is derived 
directly from vital factors, all the fruitful potentialities in the 
original formulation of the problem^ are liable to be jettisoned in 
the manner of its solution. 



II, THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

i The problem of generations is important enough to merit 
{serious consideration. It is one of the indispensable guides to an 
understanding of the structure of social and intellectual move- 

1 See ( 1 6) in the biliography, 

2 O. Lorenz sought to substitute for the century as unit a more rationally 
deducible unit of three generations. Scherer emphasizes a 6oo-year rhythm 
in his History of Literature, pp. i8 ff. We shall have to refer to the work of the 
modern literary historians Kummers and Petersen, as well as L. von Wiese, in 
the next part of this investigation. 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 287 

iments. Its practical importance becomes clear as soon as one tries 
''to obtain a more exact understanding of the accelerated pace of 
social change characteristic of our time. It would be regrettable 
if extra-scientific methods were permanently to conceal elements 
of the problem capable of immediate investigation. 

It is clear from the foregoing survey of the problem as it stands 
today that a commonly accepted approach to it does not exist. 
The social sciences in various countries only sporadically take 
account of the achievements of their neighbours. In particular, 
German research into the problem of generations has ignored 
results obtained abroad. Moreover, the problem has been 
tackled by specialists in many different sciences in succession; 
thus, we possess a number of interesting sidelights on the problem 
as well as contributions to an overall solution, but no consciously 
directed research on the basis of a clear formulation of the 
problem as a whole. 

The multiplicity of points of view, resulting both from the 
peculiarities of the intellectual traditions of various nations and 
from those of the individual sciences, is both attractive and 
fruitful; and there can be no doubt that such a wide problem can 
only be solved as a result of co-operation between the most 
diverse disciplines and nationalities. However, the co-operation 
must somehow be planned and directed from an organic centre. 
The present status of the problem of generations thus affords 
a striking illustration of the anarchy in the social and cultural 
sciences, where everyone starts out afresh from his own point of 
view (to a certain extent, of course, this is both necessary and 
fruitful), never pausing to consider the various aspects as part 
of a single general problem, so that the contributions of the 
various disciplines to the collective solution could be planned. 

Any attempt at over-organization of the social and cultural 
sciences is naturally undesirable: but it is at least worth con- 
sidering whether there is not perhaps one discipline — according 
to the nature of the problem in question — which could act as 
the organizing centre for work on it by all the others. As far as 
generations are concerned, the task of sketching the layout of the 
problem undoubtedly falls to sociology. It seems to be the task 
of Formal Sociology to work out the simplest, but at the same time 
the most fundamental facts relating to the phenomenon of 
generations. Within the sphere of formal sociology, however, the 
problem lies on the borderline between the static and the dynamic 
types of investigation. Whereas formal sociology up to now has 
tended for the most part to study the social existence of man 
exclusively statically, this particular problem seems to be one of 
those which have to do with the ascertainment of the origin of 



288 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

social dynamism and of the laws governing the action of the 
dynamic components of the social process. Accordingly, this is 
the point where we have to make the transition from the formal 
static to the formal dynamic and from thence to applied historical 
sociology — all three together comprising the complete field of 
sociological research. 

In the succeeding pages we shall attempt to work out in formal 
sociological terms all the most elementary facts regarding the 
phenomenon of generations, without the elucidation of which 
historical research into the problem cannot even begin. We shall 
try to incorporate any results of past investigations, which have 
proved themselves relevant, ignoring those..3vhich do not seem to 
be sufficiently well founded. 

A. CONCRETE GROUP SOCIAL LOCATION (lAGERUNG) 

To obtain a clear idea of the basic structure of the phenomenon 
of generations, we must clarify the specific inter-relations of the 
individuals comprising a single generation-unit. ~ 

The unity of a generation does not consist primarily in a social 
bond of the kind that leads to the formation of a concrete group, 
although it may sometimes happen that a feeling for the unity of 
a generation is consciously developed into a basis for the formation 
of concrete groups, as in the case of the modern German Youth 
Movement. 1 But in this case, the groups are most often mere 
cliques, with the one distinguishing characteristic that group- 
formation is based upon the consciousness of belonging to one 
generation, rather than upon definite objectives. 

Apart from such a particular case, however, it is possible in 
■ general to draw a distinction between generations as mere col- 
lective facts on the one hand, and concrete social groups on the 
; other. 

Organizations for specific purposes, the family, tribe, sect, 
are all examples of such concrete groups. Their common charac- 
teristic is that the individuals of which they are composed do 
actually in concrete form a group, whether the entity is based on 
vital, existential ties of 'proximity' or on the conscious application 
of the rational will. All 'community' groups {Gemeinschaftsgebilde), 
such as the family and the tribe, come under the former heading, 
while the latter comprises 'association' groups {Gesellschaftsgebilde), 

The generation is not a concrete group in the sense of a com- 
munity, i.e. a group which cannot exist without its members 
having concrete knowledge of each other, and which ceases to 

1 In this connection it would be desirable to work out the exact differences 
between modern youth movements and the age-groups of men's societies formed 
amongst primitive peoples, carefully described by H. Schurtz (27). 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 289 

exist as a mental and spiritual unit as soon as physical proximity 
is destroyed. On the other hand, it is in no way comparable to 
associations such as organizations formed for a specific purpose, 
for the latter are characterized by a deliberate act of foundation, 
written statutes, and a machinery for dissolving the organization 
— features serving to hold the group together, even though it 
lacks the ties of spatial proximity and of community of life. 

By a concrete group, then, we mean the union of a number 
of individuals through naturally developed or consciously willed - 
ties. Although the members of a generation are undoubtedly bound ^/ 
together in certain ways, the ties between them have not resulted 
in a concrete group. How, then, can we define and understand the 
nature of the generation as a social phenomenon? 

An answer may perhaps be found if we reflect upon the charac- 
ter of a different sort of social category, materially quite unhkq 
the generation but bearing a certain structural resemblance to itj 1 
— namely, the class position {Klassenlage) of an individual irt I 
society. ^ \ 

In its wider sense class-position can be defined as the common 
'location' [Lagerung] certain individuals hold in the economic and 
power structure of a given society as their 'lot'. One is proletarian, 
entrepreneur, or rentier, and he is what he is because he is con- 
stantly aware of the nature of his specific 'location' in the social 
structure, i.e. of the pressures or possibilities of gain resulting from 
that position. This place in society does not resemble membership 
of an organization terminable by a conscious act of will. Nor is it 
at all binding in the same way as membership of a community 
{Gemeinschqft) which means that a concrete group aflfects every 
aspect of an individual's existence. 

It is possible to abandon one's class position through an 
individual or collective rise or fall in the social scale, irrespective 
for the moment whether this is due to personal merit, personal 
effort, social upheaval, or mere chance. 

Membership of an organization lapses as soon as we give 
notice of our intention to leave it; the cohesion of the community 
group ceases to exist if the mental and spiritual dispositions on 
which its existence has been based cease to operate in us or in our 
partners; and our previous class position loses its relevance for us 
as soon as we acquire a new position as a result of a change in 
our economic and power status. 

Class position is an objective fact, whether the individual in 
question knows his class position or not, and whether he acknow- ^r\\ 
ledges it or not. i 

Class-consciousness does not necessarily accompany a class 
position, although in certain social conditions the latter can give 

E.s.K. — 19 



290 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

rise to the former, lending it certain features, and resulting in the 
formation of a 'conscious class'. i At the moment, however, we 
are only interested in the general phenomenon of social location as 
such. Besides the concrete social group, there is also the phenom- 
enon of similar location of a number of individuals in a social 
structure — under which heading both classes and generations 
fall. 

We have now taken the first step towards an analysis of the 
'location' phenomenon as distinct from the phenomenon ^concrete 
group' , and this much at any rate is clear — viz. the unity of genera- 
tions is constituted essentially by a similarity of location of a 
number of individuals within a social whole. 

B. THE BIOLOGICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL FORMULATION OF THE 
PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

Similarity of location can be defined only by specifying the 
structure within which and through which location groups 
emerge in historical-social reality. Class-position was based upon f 
• the existence of a changing economic and power structure in ? 
rsociety. Generation location is based on the existence of biological 
rhythm in human existence — the factors of life and death, a 
limited span of life, and ageing. Individuals who belong to the 
same generation, who share the same year of birth, are endowed, 
to that extent, with a common location in the historical dimension 
of the social process. 

Now, one might assume that the sociological phenomenon of 
location can be explained by, and deduced from, these basic 
biological factors. But this would be to make the mistake of all 
naturalistic theories which try to deduce sociological phenomena 
directly from natural facts, or lose sight of the social phenomenon 
altogether in a mass of primarily anthropological data. Anthropo-'* 
logy and biology only help us explain the phenomena of life and = 
death, the limited span of life, and the mental, spiritual, and 
physical changes accompanying ageing as such; they offer no 
explanation of the relevance these primary factors have for the \ 
shaping of social interrelationships in their historic flux. J 

The sociological phenomenon of generations is ultimately based 
on the biological rhythm of birth and death. But to be based on a 
factor does not necessarily mean to be deducible from it, or to be 

1 It is a matter for historical and sociological research to discover at what 
stage in its development, and under what conditions, a class becomes class- 
conscious, and similarly, when individual members of a generation become 
conscious of their common situation and make this consciousness the basis of 
their group solidarity. Why have generations become so conscious of their 
unity to-day? This is the first question we have to answer in this context. 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS Q91 

implied in it. If a phenomenon is based on another, it could not 
exist without the latter; however, it possesses certain charac-!- 
teristics peculiar to itself, characteristics in no way borrowed 
from the basic phenomenon. Were it not for the existence of 
social interaction between human beings — were there no definable 
social structure, no history based on a particular sort of continuity, 
the generation would not exist as a social location phenomenon; 
there would merely be birth, ageing, and death. The sociological" 
problem of generations therefore begins at that point where the 
sociological relevance of these biological factors is discovered. 
Starting with the elementary phenomenon itself, then, we must^ 
first of all try to understand the generatiqn as a particular type! 
of social location. 

C. THE TENDENCY 'INHERENT IN' A SOCIAL LOCATION 

jrThe fact of belonging to the same class, and that of belonging 
to the same generation or age group, have this in common, that 
both endow the individuals sharing in them with a common 
location in the social and historical process, and thereby limit 
them to a specific range of potential experience, predisposing 
them for a certain characteristic mode of thought and experience, 
and a characteristic type of historically relevant action. Any 
given location, then, excludes a large number of possible modes of 
thought, experience, feeling, and action, and restricts the range 
of self-expression open to the individual to certain circumscribed 
possibilities. This negative delimitation, however, does not exhaust 
the matter. Inherent in a positive sense in every location is a tend- 
ency pointing towards certain definite modes of behaviour, 
feeling, and thought. 

We shall therefore speak in this sense of a tendency 'inherent! 
in' every social location; a tendency which can be determined ' 
from the particular nature of the location as such. "^ 

For any group of individuals sharing the same class position, 
society always appears under the same aspect, familiarized by 
constantly repeated experience. It may be said in general that the 
experiential, intellectual, and emotional data which are available 
to the members of a certain society are not uniformly 'given' to 
all of them; the fact is rather that each class has access to only one 
set of those data, restricted to one particular 'aspect'. Thus, the ' 
proletarian most probably appropriates only a fraction of the 
cultural heritage of his society, and that in the manner of his 1 
group. Even a mental climate as rigorously uniform as that of the 
Catholic Middle Ages presented itself differently according to 
whether one were a theologizing cleric, a knight, or a monk. But 
even where the intellectual material is more or less uniform or at 



4 

^ 



oqo T?IE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

least uniformly accessible to all, the approach to the material, the 
way in which it is assimilated and applied, is determined in its 
direction by social factors. We usually say in such cases that the 
approach is determined by the special traditions of the social 
stratum concerned. But these traditions themselves are explicable 
and understandable not only in terms of. the history of the 
stratum but above all in terms of the location relationships of its 
members within the society. Traditions bearing in a particular! 
direction only persist so long as the location relationships of the \ 
group acknowledging them remain more or less unchanged.J 
The concrete form of an existing behaviour pattern or of a cultural 
product does not derive from the history of a particular tradition 
but ultimately from the history of the location relationships in' 
which it originally arose and hardened itself into a tradition. 

D. FUNDAMENTAL FACTS IN RELATION TO GENERATIONS 

- According to what we have said so far, the s_ocial phenomenon 
'generati on' represents nothing more than a particular kind of 
identity of location, embracing related 'age groups' embedded 

V in a historical-social process. While the nature of c^ass, location 
can be explained in terms of economic and social conditions, 
generation location is determined by the way in which certain 
patterns of experience and thought tend to be brought into 
existence by the natural data of the transition from one generation 
to another. 

The best way to appreciate which features of social life result 
from the existence of generations is to make the experiment of 
imagining what the social life of man would be like if one genera- 
tion lived on for ever and none followed to replace it. In contrast 
to such a Utopian, imaginary society, our own has the following 
characteristics :i 

[a) new participants in the cultural process are emerging, 
whilst 

{b) former participants in that process are continually dis- 
appearing; 

[c) members of any one generation can participate only in a 
"^ temporally limited section of the historical process, and 

[d) it is therefore necessary continually to transmit the accumu- 
lated cultural heritage; 

, [e] the transition from generation to generation is a continuous 
process. 

These are the basic phenomena implied by the mere fact of 

1 Since actual experiments are precluded by the nature of the social sciences, 
such a 'mental experiment' can often help to isolate the important factors. 



y 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 293 

the existence of generations, apart from one specific phenomenon 
we choose to ignore for the moment, that of physical and mental 
ageing. 1 With this as a beginning, let us then investigate the bearing 
of these elementary facts upon formal sociology. 

{a) The continuous emergence of new participants in the cultural process 

In contrast to the imaginary society with no generations, our 
own — in which generation follows generation — is principally 
characterized by the fact that cultural creation and cultural 
accumulation are not accomplished by the same individuals — 
instead, we have the continuous emergence of new age groups. ■' 
T' This means, in the first place, that our culture is developed 
by individuals who come into contact anew with the accumulated 
heritage. In the nature of our psychical make-up, a fresh contact 
(meeting something anew) always means a changed relationship 
of distance from the object and a novel approach in assimilating, 
using, and developing the proffered material. The_phenomenon 
of 'fresh cont act' is, incidentally, of great significance in many 
social contexts; the problem of generations is only one among 
those upon which it has a bearing. Fresh contacts play an im- 
portant part in the life of the individual when he is forced by 
events to leave his own social group and enter a new one — ^when, 
for example, an adolescent leaves home, or a peasant the country- 
side for the town, or when an emigrant changes his home, or a 
social climber his social status or class. It is well known that in all 
these cases a quite visible and striking transformation of the 
consciousness of the individual in question takes place: a change, 
not merely in the content of experience, but in the individual's 
mental and spiritual adjustment to it. In all these cases, however, 
the fresh contact is an event in one individual biography, whereas 
in the case of generations, we may speak of 'fresh contacts' in 
the sense of the additioiT of new psycho-physical units who are 
in the literalseme^beginning^a 'riew life'. Whereas the adolescent, 
peasant, emigrant, and social climber can only in a more or less 
restricted sense be said to begin a 'new life', in the case of genera- 
tions, the 'fresh contact' with the social and cultural heritage is 
determined not by mere social change, but by fundamental 
biological factors. We can accordingly differentiate between two 
types of 'fresh contact' : one based on a shift in social relations, 

1 Cf. Spranger (28) on 'being young' and 'becoming old', and the intellectual 
and spiritual significance of these phenomena. (He also gives references to 
other literature on the psychology of the adolescent — whereon see also Honigs- 
heim (19)). Further, see A. E. Brinckmann (4) (who proceeds by way of interpre- 
tive analysis of works of art), Jacob Grimm (15), F. Ball (5), Giese (14a). 
Literature relating to the youth movement, which constitutes a problem in 
itself, is not included in the biography at the end of this book. 



294 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

; and the other on vital factors (the change from one generation to 
^ another). The latter type is potentially much more radical, since 
with the advent of the new participant in the process of culture, 
the change of attitude takes place in a different individual whose 
attitude towards the heritage handed down by his predecessors 
is a novel one. 

Were there no change of generation, there would be no 'fresh 
'"' contact' of this biological type. If the cultural process were always 
carried on and developed by the same individuals, then, to be sure, 
'fresh contacts' might still result from shifts in social relationships, 
but the more radical form of 'fresh contact' would be missing. 
Once established, any fundamental social pattern (attitude or 
intellectual trend) would probably be perpetuated — in itself an 
advantage, but not if we consider the dangers resulting from one- 
sidedness. There might be a certain compensation for the loss of 
fresh generations in such a Utopian society only if the people 
living in it were possessed, as befits the denizens of a Utopia, of 
perfectly universal minds — minds capable of experiencing all 
that there was to experience and of knowing all there was to 
know, and enjoying an elasticity such as to make it possible at 
any time to start afresh. 'Fresh contacts' resulting from shifts 
in the historical and social situation could suffice to bring about 
the changes in thought and practice necessitated by changed 
conditions only if the individuals experiencing these fresh contacts 
^ had such a perfect 'elasticity of mind'. Thus the continuous-j 
emergence of new human beings in our own society acts as 
compensation for the restricted and partial nature of the indi- 
vidual consciousness. The continuous emergence of new human.1 
beings certainly results in some loss of accumulated cultural 
possessions; but, on the other hand, it alone makes a fresh 
selection possible when it becomes necessary; it facilitates re- 
evaluation of our inventory and teaches us both to forget that 
which is no longer useful and to covet that which has yet to be 
won. 

[b) The continuous withdrawal of previous participants in the process of 
culture 

The function of this second factor is implied in what has 
already been said. It serves the necessary social purpose of 
enabling us to forget. If society is to continue, social remembering ] 
is just as important as forgetting and action starting from scratch. J 
At this point we must make clear in what social form remem- 
/ bering manifests itself and how the cultural heritage is actually 
accumulated. All psychic and cultural data only really exist in t 
so far as they are produced and reproduced in the present: hjencej 



■K 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 295 

past experience is only relevant when it exists concretely in- 
corporated in the present. In our present context, we have to f 
consider two ways in which past experience can be incorporated 
in the present: 

(i) as consciously recognized models 1 on which men pattern 
their behaviour (for example, the majority of subsequent 
revolutions tended to model themselves more or less consciously 
on the French Revolution); or 

(ii) as unconsciously 'condensed', merely 'implicit' or 'virtual' 
patterns; consider, for instance, how past experiences are 'virtu- 
ally' contained in such specific manifestations as that of senti- 
mentality. Every present performance operates a certain selection 
among handed-down data, for the most part unconsciously. That 
is, the traditional material is transformed to fit a prevailing new 
situation, or hitherto unnoticed or neglected poteq,tialities 
inherent in that material are discovered in the course of developing 
new patterns of action. 2 

f- At the more primitive levels of social life, we mostly encounter 
' unconscious selection. There the past tends to be present in a 
\_'condensed', 'implicit', and 'virtual' form only. Even at the 
present level of social reality, we see this unconscious selection at 
work in the deeper regions of our intellectual and spiritual lives, 
where the tempo of transformation is of less significance. A con- 
scious and reflective selection becomes necessary only when a 
semi-conscious transformation, such as can be effected by the 
traditionalist mind, is no longer sufficient. In general, rational/ 
elucidation and reflectiveness invade only those realms of experi-i 
ence which become problematic as a result of a change in the ■ 
historical and social situation; where that is the case, the necessary, 
transformation can no longer be eflfected without conscious] 
reflection and its technique of de-stabilization. | 

We are directly aware primarily of those aspects of our culture 
which have become subject to reflection; and these contain only 

1 This is not the place to enumerate all the many forms of social memory. 
We will therefore deliberately simplify the matter by limiting ourselves to two 
extreme alternatives. 'Consciously recognized models' include, in the wider 
sense, also the body of global knowledge, stored in libraries. But this sort of -' 
knowledge is only effective in so far as it is continually actualized. This can 
happen in two ways — either intellectually, when it is used as a pattern or 
guide for action, or spontaneously, when it is 'virtually present' as condensed 
experience. 

" Instinct, as well as repressed and unconscious knowledge, as dealt with in 
particular by Freud, would need separate treatment. 

2 This process of discovery of hidden possibilities inherent in transmitted 
material alone makes it clear why it is that so many revolutionary and reformist 
movements are able to a:raft their new truths on to old ones. 



296 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

those elements which in the course of development have somehow, 
at some point, become problematical. This is not to say, however, ~ 
that once having become conscious and reflective, they cannot again 
sink back into the a-problematical, untouched region of vegetative 
life. In any case, that form of memory which contains the past 
in the form of reflection is much less significant — e.g. it extends 
over a much more restricted range of experience — than that in 
which the past is only 'implicitly', 'virtually' present; and 
reflective elements are more often dependent on unreflective 
elements than vice versa. 

Here we must make a fundamental distinction between 
appropriated memories and personally acquired m.emoTies (a distinction 
applicable both to reflective and unreflective elements) . It makes 
a great diflference whether I acquire memories for myself in the 
process of personal development, or whether I simply take them 

-over from someone else. I only really possess those 'memories' 
which I have created directly for myself, only that 'knowledge' I 
have personally gained in real situations. This is the only sort of 
knowledge which really 'sticks' and it alone has real binding 

(jDOwer. Hence, although it would appear desirable that man's 
spiritual and intellectual possessions should consist of nothing but 
individually acquired memories, this would also involve the 
danger that the earlier ways of possession and acquisition will 
inhibit the new acquisition of knowledge. That experience goes 
with age is in many ways an advantage. That, on the other hand, 
youth lacks experience means a lightening of the ballast for the 
young; it facilitates their living on in a changing world. One is 
old primarily in so far as^ he comes to live within a specific, 
individually acquired, framework of useable past experience, so 
that every new experience has its form and its place largely 
marked out for it in advance. In youth, on the other hand, where 
life is new, formative forces are just coming into being, and basic 
attitudes in the process of development can take advantage of 
the moulding power of new situations. Thus a human race living] 
on for ever would have to learn to forget to compensate for the , 
lack of new generations. 

^ {c) Members of ayiy one generation can only participate in a temporally 
limited section of the historical process . 

The implications of this basic fact can also be worked out in 
the light of what has been said so far. The first two factors, {a) 
and {b), were only concerned with the aspects of constant 
'rejuvenation' of society. To be able to start afi^h wkh^new life, 

' That is, if we ignore — as we said we would — the biological factors of 
physical and psychological ageing. 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 297 

to build a new destiny, a new framework of anticipations, upon a 
new set of experiences, are things which can come into the world 
only through the fact of new birth. All this is implied by the factor 
of social rejuvenation. The factor we are dealing with now, 
however, can be adequately analysed only in terms of the category 
of 'similarity of location' which we have mentioned but not 
discussed in detail above. 1 

Members of a generation are 'similarly located', first of all, in 
so far as they all are exposed to the same phase of the collective 
process. This, however, is a merely mechanical and external 
criterion of the phenomenon of 'similar location'. For a deeper 
understanding, we must turn to the phenomenon of the 'strati- 
fi_catiori^_of exp erience { Erkbnisschichtung), just as before we turned 
to 'memory'. The tact that people are Dorn at the same time, or 
that their youth, adulthood, and old age coincide, does not in 
itself involve similarity of location; what does create a similar 
location is that they are in a position to experience the same events 
and data, etc., and especially that these experiences impinge upon 
a simil arly 'stratifi e d' c onsciousness. It is not diflScult to see why 
mere chronological contemporaneity cannot of itself produce a 
common generation location. No one, for example, would assert 

1 It must be emphasized that this 'ability to start afresh' of which we are 
speaking has nothing to do with 'conservative' and 'progressive' in the usual 
sense of these terms. Nothing is more false than the usual assumption uncriti- 
cally shared by most students of generations, that the younger generation is 
'progressive' and the older generation eo ipso conservative. Recent experiences 
have shown well enough that the old liberal generation tends to be more 
politically progressive than certain sections of the youth (e.g. the German 
Students' Associations — Burschenschaften — etc.). 'Conservative' and 'progressive''^ 
are categories of historical sociology, designed to deal with the descriptive 
contents of the dynamism of a historical period of history, whereas 'old' and 
'young' and the concept of the 'fresh contact' of a generation are categories 
belonging to formal sociology. Whether youth will be conservative, reactionary, 
or progressive, depends (if not entirely, at least primarily) on whether or not 
the existing social structure and the position they occupy in it provide oppor- 
tunities for the promotion of their own social and intellectual ends. Their 
'being young', the 'freshness' of their contact with the world, manifest them- 
selves in the fact that they are able to re-orient any movement they embrace, 
to adopt it to the total situation. (Thus, for instance, they must seek within 
Conservatism the particular form of this political and intellectual current best 
suited to the requirements of the modern situation: or within Socialism, in 
the same way, an up-to-date formulation.) This lends considerable support to I 
the fundamental thesis of this essay, which will have to be further substantiated/ 
later — that biological factors (such as youth and age) do not of themselvesj 
involve a definite intellectual or practical orientation (youth cannot be auto-l 
matically correlated with a progressive attitude and so on); they merely! 
initiate certain formal tendencies, the actual manifestations of which willi 
ultimately depend on the prevailing social and cultural context. Any attempt) 
to establish a direct identity or correlation between biological and cultural 
data leads to a quid pro quo which can only confuse the issue. 



og8 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

that there wag community of location between the young people 
-of China and Germany about 1800. Only where contemporaries^ 
definitely are in a position to participate as an integrated group 
lin certain common experiences can we rightly speak of com- 
(^munity of location of a generation. Mere contemporaneity 
becomes sociologically significant only when it also involves 
participation in the same historical and social circumstances. 
Further, we have to take into consideration at this point the 
phenomenon of 'stratification', mentioned above. Some older 
generation groups experience certain historical processes together 
with the young generation and yet we cannot say that they havet 
the same generation location. The fact that their location is an 
different one, however, can be explained primarily by the different ) 
'stratification' of their lives. The human consciousness, structurally J 
speaking, is characterized by a particular inner 'dialectic'. It is 
of considerable importance for the formation of the consciousness 
which experiences happen to make those all-important 'first 
impressions', 'childhood experiences' — and which follow to form 
the second, third, and other 'strata'. Conversely, in estimating the 
biographical significance of a particular experience, it is important 
to know whether it is undergone by an individual as a decisive 
childhood experience, or later in life, superimposed upon other 
basic and early impressions. Early impressions tend to coalesce-" 
into a natural view of the world. All later experiences then tend ■* 
to receive their meaning from this original set, whether they., 
appear as that set's verification and fulfilment or as its negation 
and antithesis. Experiences are not accumulated in the course 
of a lifetime through a process of summation or agglomeration, 
but are 'dialectically' articulated in the way described. We 
cannot here analyse the specific forms of this dialectical articula- 
tion, which is potentially present whenever we act, think, or feel, 
in more detail (the relationship of 'antithesis' is only one way in 
Vi which new experiences may graft themselves upon old ones) . This 
much, however, is certain, that even if the rest of one's life con- 
sisted in one long process of negation and destruction of the natural 
world view acquired in youth, the determining influence of these 
early impressions would still be predominant. For even in negation 
our orientation is fundamentally centred upon that which is ! 
being negated, and we are thus still unwittingly determined by it. ^ 
If we bear in mind that every concrete experience acquires its 
particular face and form from its relation to this primary stratum 
of experiences from which all others receive their meaning, we 
can appreciate its importance for the further development of 
the human consciousness. Another fact, closely related to the 
phenomenon just described, is that any two generations following 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 299 

one another always fight different opponents, both within and 
without. While the older people may still be combating something 
in themselves or in the external world in such fashion that all their 
feelings and efforts and even their concepts and categories of 
thought are determined by that adversary, for the younger people 
this adversary may be simply non-existent: their primary orien- 
tation is an entirely different one. That historical development 
does not proceed in a straight line — a feature frequently observed 
particularly in the cultural sphere — is largely attributed to this 
shifting of the 'polar' components of life, that is, to the fact that 
internal or external^ adversaries constantly disappear and are 
replaced by others. Now this particular dialectic, of changing-- 
generations, would be absent from our imaginary society. The4 
only dialectical features of such a society would be those which 
would arise from social polarities — provided such polarities were 
present. The primary experiential stratum of the members of this 
imaginary society would simply consist of the earliest experiences 
of mankind; all later experience would receive its meaning from 
that stratum. 

[d] The necessity for constant transmission of the cultural heritage 

Some structural facts which follow from this must at least be 
indicated here. To mention one problem only: a Utopian, im- 
mortal society would not have to face this necessity of cultural 
transmission, the most important aspect of which is the automatic 
passing on to the new generations of the traditional ways of life, 
feelings, and attitudes. The data transmitted by conscious teaching-j 
are of more limited importance, both quantitatively and qualita- "< 
tively. All those attitudes and ideas which go on functioning '■■ 
satisfactorily in the new situation and serve as the basic inventory 
of group life are unconsciously and unwittingly handed on and 
transmitted: they seep in without either the teacher or pupil . 
knowing anything about it. What is consciously learned or in- , ■ 
culcated belongs to those things which in the course of time have ; 
somehow, somewhere, become problematic and therefore invited , 
conscious reflection. This is why that inventory of experience *^"^ 
which is absorbed by infiltration from the environment in early | , . 
youth often becomes the historically oldest stratum of conscious- "^ 
ness, which tends to stabilize itself as the natural view of the world. 1 . 

1 It is difficult to decide just at what point this process is complete in an 
individual — at what point this unconscious vital inventory (which also contains 
the national and provincial peculiarities out of which national and provincial 
entelechies can develop) is stabilized. The process seems to stop once the 
inventoiy of a-problematical experience has virtually acquired its final form. 
The child or adolescent is always open to new influences if placed in a new 



300 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

But in early childhood even many reflective elements arc 
assimilated in the same 'a-problematical' fashion as those elements 
of the basic inventory had been. The new germ of an original 
intellectual and spiritual life which is latent in the new human 
being has by no means as yet come into its own. The possibility 
of really questioning and reflecting on things only emerges at 
the point where personal experimentation with life begins — round 
about the age of 17, sometimes a little earlier and sometimes 
\/ a little later. 1 It is only then that life's problems begin to be 
'located in a 'present' and are experienced as such. That level of 
data and attitudes which social change has rendered problem- 
atical, and which therefore requires reflection, has now been 
reached; for the first time, one lives 'in the present'. Combative 
iuvenile groups struggle to clarify these issues, but never realise 
that, however radical they are, they are merely out to transform 
the uppermost stratum of consciousness which is open to conscious 
reflection. For it seems that the deeper strata are not easily de- 
stabilized^ and that when this becomes necessary, the process 
must start out from the level of reflection and work down to the 
^ stratum of habits. ^ The 'up-to-dateness' of youth therefore consists 

milieu. They readily assimilate new unconscious mental attitudes and habits, 
and change their language or dialect. The adult, transferred into a new en- 
vironment, consciously transforms certain aspects of his modes of thought and 
behaviour, but never acclimatizes himself in so radical and thoroughgoing 
. a fashion. His fundamental attitudes, his vital inventor}', and, among external 
manifestations, his language and dialect, remain for the most part on an earlier 
level. It appears that language and accent offer an indirect indication as to 
how far the foundations of a person's consciousness are laid, his basic view of 
the world stabilized. If the point can be determined at which a man's language 
and dialect cease to change, there is at least an external criterion for the 
determination also of the point at which his unconscious inventory of experi- 
' ence ceases to accumulate. According to A. Meillet, the spoken language and 
^dialect does not change in an individual after the age of 25 years. (A. Meillet: 
Methods dans les sciences, Paris, Alcan, 191 1; also his 'Introduction a I'etude 
comparative des langues indo-europe'enna' 1903, as quoted in Mentre (19), 
p. 306 ff.) 

1 Spranger (28) also assumes an important turning point about the age of 
17 or so (p. 145). 

2 This throws some light on the way in which 'ideas' appear to precede real 
social transformation. 'Ideas' are understood here in the French rather than 
in the Platonic sense. This 'modern Idea' has a tendency to de-stabilize and 
set in motion the social structure. It does not exist in static social units — for 
example, in self-contained peasant communities — which tend to draw on an 
unconscious, traditional way of life. In such societies, we do not find the 
younger generation, associated with ideas of this kind, rising against their 
elders. 'Being young' here is a question of biological differentiation. More on 
this matter later. 

3 The following seems to be the sequence in which this process unfolds: first 
the 'conditions' change. Then concrete behaviour begins unconsciously to 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 301 

in their being closer to the 'present' problems (as a_resiilt of thejr 
'potentially fresh contact' discussed above, pp. 2 ^^ if.), and nTthe 
fact thaT they are dramatically aware of a process of de-stabiliza- 
tion and take sides in it. All this while, the older generation cling 
to the re-orientation that had been the drama of their youth. 

From this angle, we can see tliat an adequate education or 
instruction of the young (in the sense of the complete transmission 
of all experiential stimuli which underlie pragmatic knowledge) 
would encounter a formidable difficulty in the fact that the 
experiential problems of the young are defined by a different 
set of adversaries from those of their teachers. Thus (apart from 
the exact sciences), the teacher-pupil relationship is not as 
between one representative of 'consciousness in general' and 
another, but as between one possible subjective centre of vital 
orientation and another subsequent one. This tension^ appears 
incapable of solution except for one compensating factor: not 
only does the teacher educate his pupil, but the pupil educates 
his teacher too. Generations are in a state of constant inter- 
action. 

This leads us to our next point: 

[e) The uninterrupted generation series. 

The fact that the transition from one generation to another ^ 
takes place continuously tends to render this interaction smoother; 
in the process of this interaction, it is not the oldest who meet 
the youngest at once; the first contacts are made by other 'inter- 
mediary' generations, less removed from ea ch othe r. - -* 
, Fortunately, it is not aslnoslYtudents'ofthe generation problem 
j suggest — the thirty-year interval is not solely decisive. Actually, 
I all intermediary groups play their part; although they cannot wipe 
out the biological difference between generations, they can at 

transform itself in the new situation. The individual seeks to react to the new 
situation, by instinctive, unconscious adjustment. (Even the most fanatical 
adherent of an orthodoxy constantly indulges in an adaptive change of his 
behaviour in respects which are not open to conscious observation.) If the 
dynamic of the situation results in too quick cultural change and the upheaval 
is too great, if unconscious adjustment proves inadequate and behaviour 
adaptations fail to 'function' in the sudden new situation, so that an aspect of 
reality becomes problematic, then that aspect of reality will be made conscious 
— on the level of either mythology, philosophy, or science, according to the 
stage of cultural evolution reached. From this point on, the unravelling of the 
deeper layers proceeds, as required by the situation. 

1 L. von Wiese (31), gives a vivid description of this father-son antagonism. Of 
considerable importance is the suggestion that the father is more or less forced 
into the role of respresenting 'Society' to his son (p. 196). 



V 



302 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

least mitigate its consequences. The extent to which the problems 
of younger generations are reflected back upon the older one 
becomes greater in the measure that the dynamism of society 
increases. Static conditions make for attitudes of piety-^the 
younger generation tends to adapt itself to the older, even to the 
point of making itself appear older. With the strengthening of| 
the social dynamic, however, the older generation becomes in-j 
creasingly receptive to influences from the younger, i This process 
can be so intensified that, with an elasticity of mind won in the 
course of experience, the older generation may even achieve 
greater adaptability in certain spheres than the intermediary 
generations, who may not yet be in a position to relinquish their 
original approach. 2 

Thus, the continuous shift in objective conditions has its 
counterpart in a continuous shift in the oncoming new generations 
which are first to incorporate the changes in their behaviour 
system. As the tempo of change becomes faster, smaller and smaller 
modifications are experienced by young people as significant 
ones, and more and more intermediary shades of novel impulses 
become interpolated between the oldest and newest re-orientation 
systems. The underlying inventory of vital responses, which 
remains unaflfected by the change, acts in itself as a unifying 
factor; constant interaction, on the other hand, mitigates the 
diflferences in the top layer where the change takes place, while 
the continuous nature of the transition in normal times lessens 
/the frictions involved. To sum up: if the social process involved 
no change of generations, the new impulses that can originate 
only in new organisms could not be reflected back upon the 
representatives of the tradition; and if the transition between 
generations were not continuous, this reciprocal action could not ' 
take place without friction. 

E. GENERATION STATUS, GENERATION AS ACTUALITY, GENERA- 
TION UNIT 

This, then, broadly constitutes those aspects of generation 
phenomena which can be deduced by formal analysis. They 
would completely determine the eflfects resulting from the existence 
of generations if they could unfold themselves in a purely bio- 
logical context, or if the generation phenomenon could be 

1 It should be noted, on the other hand, as L. von Wiese {op. cit., p. 197) 
points out, that with the modern trend towards individualism, every individual 
claims more than before the right to 'live his own life'. 

2 This is a further proof that natural biological factors characteristic of old 
age can be invalidated by social forces, and that biological data can almost be '• 
turned into their opposites by social forces. 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS ^sosN 

understood as a mere location phenomenon. However, a genera- -t 
tion in the sense of a location phenomenon falls short of encom- • -^ 
passing the generation phenomenon in its full actuality. i The., 
latter is something more than the former, in the same way as the 
mere fact of class position does not yet involve the existence of a 
consciously constituted class. The location as such only contains 
potentialities which may materialize, or be suppressed, or become 
embedded in other social forces and manifest themselves in 
modified form. When we pointed out that mere co-existence in 
time did not even suffice to bring about community of generation 
location, we came very near to making the distinction which is 
now claiming our attention. In order to share the same generation 
location, i.e. in order to be able passively to undergo or actively 
to use the handicaps and privileges inherent in a generation 
location, one must be born within the same historical and cultural 
region. Generation as an actuality, however, involves even more 
than mere co-presence in such a historical and social region. A 
further concrete nexus is needed to constitute generation as an 
actuality. This additional nexus may be described as paijicipationj^ 
in the common destiny of this historical and social unit. 2 This is the f 
phenomenon we have to examine next. 

We said above that, for example, young people in Prussia about 
1800 did not share a common generation location with young 
people in China at the same period. Membership in _the same 
historical_cqmnmnit^^ then, is the_wi dest cr it erion of c ommunity 
of sreneration location. But what is its narrowest criterion? Do 
we put ttie peasants, scattered as they are in remote districts and 
almost untouched by current upheavals, in a common actual 
generation group with the urban youth of the same period? 
-i^Certainly not!— and precisely because they remain unaffected by . 
^ the events which move the youth of the towns. We shall therefore! 
speak of a generation as an actuality only where a concrete bond is \ 
created between members of a generation by their being exposed \ 
to the social and intellectual symptoms of a process of dynamic 
de-stabilization. Thus, the young peasants we mentioned above 
only share the same generation location, without, however, being 
members of the same generation as an actuality, with the youth | 
of the town. They are similarly located, in so far as they are I 
potentially capable of being sucked into the vortex of social change, 
and, in fact, this is what happened in the wars against Napoleon, 
which stirred up all German classes. For these peasants' sons, a 

^ Up till now we have not differentiated between generation location, genera- 
lion as actuality, etc. These distinctions will now be made. 

2 Cf. the quotation from Heidegger, p. 282, above. 



304 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

mere generation location was transformed into membership of a 
generation as an actuality. Individuals of the same age, they were 
and are, however, only united as an actual generation in so far 
as they participate in the characteristic social and intellectual 
currents of their society and period, and in so far as they have an 
active or passive experience of the interactions of forces which 
made up the new situation. At the time of the wars against 
Napoleon, nearly all social strata were engaged in such a process 
of give and take, first in a wave of war enthusiasm, and later in 
a movement of religious revivalism. Here, however, a new 
question arises. Suppose we disregard all groups which do not 
actively participate in the process of social transformation — does 
this mean that all those groups which do so participate, constitute 
one generation? Fom 1800 on, for instance, we see two contrasting 
groups — one which became more and more conservative as time 
went on, as against a youth group tending to become rationalistic 
and liberal. It cannot be said that these two groups were unified 
by the same modern mentality. Can we then speak, in this case, of 
the same actual generation? We can, it seems, if we make a 
further terminological distinction. Both the romantic-conservative 
and the liberal-rationalist youth belonged to the same actual 
generation, romantic-conservatism and liberal-rationalism were 
merely two polar forms of the intellectual and social response to an 
historical stimulus experienced by all in common. Romantic- 
conservative youth, and liberal-rationalist group, belong to the 
same actual generation but form separate 'generation units' within 
it. The generation unit represents a much more concrete bond than 
the actual generation as such. Touth experiencing the same concrete 
historical problems may be said to be part of the same actual generation; 
while those groups within the same actual generation which work up the 
material of their common experiences in different specific wajys, constitute 
separate generation units. 

F. THE ORIGIN OF GENERATION UNITS 

The question now arises, what produces a generation unit? In 
what does the greater intensity of the bond consist in this case? 
The first thing that strikes one on considering any particular 
generation unit is the great similarity in the data making up the 
consciousness of its members. Mental data are of sociological 
importance not only because of their actual content, but also 
because they cause the individuals sharing them to form one 
group — they have a socializing effect. The concept of Freedom, 
for example, was important for the Liberal generation-unit, not 
merely because of the material demands implied by it, but also 
because in and through it it was possible to unite individuals 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 305 

scattered spatially and otherwise. 1 The data as such, however, 
are not the primary factor producing a group — this function 
belongs to a far greater extent to those formative forces which 
shape the data and give them character and direction. From the 
casual slogan to a reasoned system of thought, from the apparently 
isolated gesture to the finished work of art, the same formative 
tendency is often at work — the social importance of which lies 
in its power to bind individuals socially together. The profound 
emotional significance of a slogan, of an expressive gesture, or of 
a work of art lies in the fact that we not merely absorb them as 
objective data, but also as vehicles of formative tendencies and 
fundamental integrative attitudes, thus identifying ourselves with | 
a set of collective strivings. 

Fundamental integrative attitudes and formative principles are 
all-important also in the handing down of every tradition, 
firstly because they alone can bind groups together, secondly, and, 
what is perhaps even more important, they alone are really 
capable of becoming the basis of continuing practice. A mere 
statement of fact has a minimum capacity of initiating a continuing 
practice. Potentialities of a continued thought process, on the 
other hand, are contained in every thesis that has real group- 
forming potency; intuitions, feelings, and works of art which 
create a spiritual community among men also contain in them- 
selves the potentially new manner in which the intuition, feeling, 
or work of art in question can be re-created, rejuvenated and re- 
interpreted in novel situations. That is why unambiguousness, 
too great clarity is not an unqualified social value; productive 
misunderstanding is often a condition of continuing Hfe. Funda- y 
mental integrative attitudes and formative principles are the 
primary socializing forces in the history of society, and it is 
necessary to live them fully in order really to participate in collec- 
tive life. 

Modern psychology provides more and more conclusive 
evidence in favour of the Gestalt theory of human perception: even 
in our most elementary perceptions of objects, we do not behave 
as the old atomistic psychology would have us believe; that is, 
we do not proceed towards a global impression by the gradual 
summation of a number of elementary sense data, but on the 
contrary, we start off with a global impression of the object as a 

^ Mental data can both bind and differentiate socially. The same concept 
of Freedom, for example, had totally different meanings for the liberal and 
the conservative generation-unit. Thus, it is possible to obtain an indication 
of the extent to which a generation is divided into generation-units by analysing 
the different meanings given to a current idea. Cf. 'Conservative Thought' 
(to follow in a later volume), where the conservative concept of Freedom is 
analysed in contrast to the liberal concept current at the same time. 

E.S.K. 20 



3o6 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

whole. Now if even sense perception is governed by the Gestalt 
principle, the same applies, to an even greater extent, to the 
process of intellectual interpretation. There may be a number of 
reasons why the functioning of human consciousness should be 
based on the Gestalt principle, but a likely factor is the relatively 
limited capacity of the human consciousness when confronted with 
the infinity of elementary data which can be dealt with only by 
means of the simplifying and summarizing gestalt approach. 
Seeing things in terms of Gestalt, however, also has its social roots 
with which we must deal here. Perceptions and their linguistic 
expressions never exist exclusively for the isolated individual who 
happens to entertain them, but also for the social group which 
stands behind the individual. Thus, the way in which seeing in 
terms of Gestalt modifies the datum as such — partly simplifying 
and abbreviating it, partly elaborating and filling it out — always 
corresponds to the meaning which the object in question has for 
the social groups as a whole. We always see things already formed 
in a special way; we think concepts defined in terms of a specific 
context. Form and context depend, in any case, on the group to 
which we belong. To become really assimilated into a group 
involves more than the mere acceptance of its characteristic 
values — it involves the ability to see things from its particular 
'aspect', to endow concepts with its particular shade of meaning, 
and to experience psychological and intellectual impulses in the 
configuration characteristic of the group. It means, further, to 
absorb those interpretive formative principles which enable the 
individual to deal with new impressions and events in a fashion 
broadly pre-determined by the group. 

The social importance of these formative and interpretive 
principles is that they form a link between spatially separated 
individuals who may never come into personal contact at all. 
Whereas mere common 'location' in a generation is of only 
potential significance, a generation as an actuality is constituted 
when similarly 'located' contemporaries participate in a common 
destiny and in the ideas and concepts which are in some way 
bound up with its unfolding. Within this community of people with 
a common destiny there can then arise particular generation-units. 
These are characterized by the fact that they do not merely 
involve a loose participation by a number of individuals in a 
pattern of events shared by all alike though interpreted by the 
diflferent individuals difterently, but an identity of responses, a 
certain affinity in the way in which all move with and are formed 
by their common experiences. 

Thus within any generation there can exist a number of 
differentiated, antagonistic generation-units. Together they 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 307 

constitute an 'actual' generation precisely l^ecause they are oriented 
toward each other, even though only in the sense of fighting one 
another. Those who were young about 1810 in Germany consti- 
tuted one actual generation whether they adhered to the then 
current version of liberal or conservative ideas. But in so far as 
they were conservative or liberal, they belonged to different units 
of that actual generation. 

The generation-unit tends to impose a much more concrete 
and binding tie on its members because of the parallelism of 
responses it involves. As a matter of fact, such new, overtly 
created, partisan integrative attitudes characterizing generation- 
units do not come into being spontaneously, without a personal 
contact among individuals, but within concrete groups where 
mutual stimulation in a close-knit vital unit inflames the partici- 
pants and enables them to develop integrative attitudes which do 
justice to the requirements inherent in their common 'location'. 
Once developed in this way, however, these attitudes and forma- 
tive tendencies are capable of being detached from the concrete 
groups of their origin and of exercising an appeal and binding 
force over a much wider area. 

The generation-unit as we have described it is not, as such, a 
concrete group, although it does have as its nucleus a concrete 
group which has developed the most essential new conceptions 
which are subsequently developed by the unit. Thus, for example, 
the set of basic ideas which became prevalent in the development 
of modern German Conservatism had its origin in the concrete 
association ^Christlich-deutsche Tischgesellschaft\ This association was 
first to take up and reformulate all the irrational tendencies 
corresponding to the overall situation prevailing at that time, and 
to the particular 'location', in terms of generation, shared by the 
young Conservatives. Ideas which later were to have recruiting 
power in far wider circles originated in this particular concrete 
group. 

The reason for the influence exercised beyond the limits of the 
original concrete group by such integrative attitudes originally 
evolved within the group is primarily that they provide a more or 
less adequate expression of the particular 'location' of a generation 
as a whole. Hence, individuals outside the narrow group but 
nevertheless similarly located find in them the satisfying expression 1 
of their location in the prevailing historical configuration. Class 
ideology, for example, originates in more closely knit concrete' 
groups and can gain ground only to the extent that other indi- , 
viduals see in it a more or less adequate expression and inter- ' 
pretation of the experiences peculiar to their particular social 
location. Similarly, the basic integrative attitudes and formative 



3o8 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

principles represented by a generation-unit, which are originally 
evolved within such a concrete group, are only really effective 
and capable of expansion into wider spheres when they formulate 
the typical experiences of the individuals sharing a generation 
location. Concrete groups can become influential in this sense if 
they succeed in evolving a 'fresh contact' in terms of a 'strati- 
fication of experience', such as we have described above. There 
is, in this respect, a further analogy between the phenomenon of 
class and that of generation. Just as a class ideology may, in 
epochs favourable to it, exercise an appeal beyond the 'location' 
which is its proper habitat, l certain impulses particular to a 
generation may, if the trend of the times is favourable to them, 
also attract individual members of earlier or later age-groups. 

But this is not all; it occurs very frequently that the nucleus of 
attitudes particular to a new generation is first evolved and prac- 
tised by older people who are isolated in their own generation 
(forerunners), 2 just as it is often the case that the forerunners in 
the development of a particular class ideology belong to a quite 
alien class. 

All this, however, does not invalidate our thesis that there are 
new basic impulses attributable to a particular generation location 
which, then, may call forth generation units. The main thing 
in this respect is that the proper vehicle of these new impulses 
is always a collectivity. The real seat of the class ideology remains 
the class itself, with its own typical opportunities and handicaps — 
even when the author of the ideology, as it may happen, belongs 
to a different class, or when the ideology expands and becomes 
influential beyond the limits of the class location. Similarly, the 
real seat of new impulses remains the generation location (which 
will selectively encourage one form of experience and eliminate 

1 In the 40s in Germany, for example, when oppositional ideas were in 
vogue, young men of the nobility also shared them. Cf. Karl Marx: 'Revolution 
and Counter-revolution in Germany'. (German edition, Stuttgart, 19 13, pp. 
20 f. and 25). 

2 For instance, Nietzsche may be considered the forerunner of the present 
neo-romanticism. An eminent example of the same thing in France is Taine, 
who under the influence of the events of 1870-71 turned towards patriotism, 
and so became the forerunner of a nationalistic generation. (Cf. Platz (25), 
pp. 43 ff.) In such cases involving forerunners, it would be advisable to make 
individual case-analyses and establish in what respect the basic structure of 
experience in the forerunner differs from that of the new generation which 
actually starts at the point where the forerunner leaves off. In this connection, 
the history of German Conservatism contains an interesting example, i.e. 
that of the jurist Hugo, whom we may consider as the founder of the 'historical 
school'. Nevertheless, he never thought in irrationalistic terms as did the members 
of the school (e.g. Savigny) in the next generation which lived through the 
Napoleonic wars. 



/ 
THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 309 

others), even when they may have been fostered by other age- 
groups. 

The most important point we have to notice is the following: 
not every generation location — not even every age-group — 
creates new collective impulses and formative principles original 
to itself and adequate to its particular situation. Where this does 
happen, we shall speak of a realization of potentialities inherent in 
the location, and it appears probable that the frequency of such 
realizations is closely connected with the tempo of social change. 1 
When as a result of an acceleration in the tempo of social and 
cultural transformation basic attitudes must change so quickly 
that the latent, continuous adaptation and modification of tradi- 
tional patterns of experience, thought, and expression is no longer 
possible, then the various new phases of experience are con- 
solidated somewhere, forming a clearly distinguishable new im- 
pulse, and a new centre of configuration. We speak in such cases 
of the formation of a new generation style, or of a new generation 
entelechy. 

Here too, we may distinguish two possibilities. On the one 
hand, the generation unit may produce its work and deeds un- 
consciously out of the new impulse evolved by itself, having an 
intuitive awareness of its existence as a group but failing to realize 
the group's character as a generation unit. On the other hand, 
groups may consciously experience and emphasize their character 
as generation units— as is the case with the contemporary German 
youth movement, or even to a certain extent with its forerunner, 
the Student's Association [Burschenschaft) Movement in the first 
half of the nineteenth century, which already manifested many of 
the characteristics of the modern youth movement. 

The importance of the acceleration of social change for the 
realization of the potentialities inherent in a generation location 
is clearly demonstrated by the fact that largely static or very 
slowly changing communities like the peasantry display no such 
phenomenon as new generation units sharply set off from their 
predecessors by virtue of an individual entelechy proper to them; 
in such communities, the tempo of change is so gradual that new\ 
generations evolve away from their predecessors without any visible ' 
break, and all we can see is the purely biological diflferentiation ' 
and affinity based upon difference or identity of age. Such 
biological factors are effective, of course, in modern society too, 
youth being attracted to youth and age to age. The generation 
unit as we have described it, however, could not arise solely on 

1 The speed of social change, for its part, is never influenced by the speed of 
the succession of generations, since this remains constant. 



3IO THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

the basis of this simple factor of attraction between members of 
the same age-group. 

The quicker the tempo of social and cultural change is, then, 
the greater are the chances that particular generation location 
y groups will react to changed situations by producing their own 
entelechy. On the other hand, it is conceivable that too greatly 
accelerated a tempo might lead to mutual destruction of the 
embryo entelechies. As contemporaries, we can observe, if we 
look closely, various finely graded patterns of response of age 
groups closely following upon each other and living side by side; 
these age groups, however, are so closely packed together that 
they do not succeed in achieving a fruitful new formulation of 
distinct generation entelechies and formative principles. Such 
generations, frustrated in the production of an individual 
entelechy, tend to attach themselves, where possible, to an earlier 
generation which may have achieved a satisfactory form, or to a 
younger generation which is capable of evolving a newer form. 
Crucial group experiences can act in this way as 'crystallizing 
agents', and it is characteristic of cultural life that unattached 
elements are always attracted to perfected configurations, even 
when the unformed, groping impulse differs in many respects from 
the configuration to which it is attracted. In this way the impulses 
and trends peculiar to a generation may remain concealed because 
of the existence of the clear-cut form of another generation to which 
they have become attached. 

From all this emerges the fact that each generation need not 
evolve its own, distinctive pattern of interpreting and influencing 
V the world; the rhythm of successive generation locations, which is 
largely based upon biological factors, need not necessarily involve 
a parallel rhythm of successive motivation patterns and formative 
principles. Most generation theories, however, have this in com- 
mon, that they try to establish a direct correlation between 
waves of decisive year classes of birth— set at intervals of thirty 
years, and conceived in a purely naturalistic, quantifying spirit — 
on the one hand, and waves of cultural changes on the other. 
Thus they ignore the important fact that the realization of hidden 
potentialities inherent in the generation location is governed by 
, extra-biological factors, principally, as we have seen, by the 
prevailing tempo and impact of social change. 

Whether a new generation style emerges every year, every thirty, 
every hundred years, or whether it emerges rhythmically at ail, 
depends entirely on the trigger action of the social and cultural 
process. One may ask, in this connection, whether the social 
dynamic operates predominantly through the agency of the 
economic or of one or the other 'ideological' spheres: but this is a 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 311 

problem which has to be examined separately. It is immaterial 
in our context how this question is answered; all we have to bear 
in mind is that it depends on this group of social and cultural 
factors whether the impulses of a generation shall achieve a 
distinctive unity of style, or whether they shall remain latent. 
The biological fact of the existence of generations merely provides 
the possibility that generation entelechies may emerge at all — if 
there were no different generations succeeding each other, we 
should never encounter the phenomenon of generation styles. 
But the question which generation locations will realize the 
potentialities inherent in them, finds its answer at the level of 
the social and cultural structure — a level regularly skipped by the 
usual kind of theory which starts from naturalism and then 
abruptly lands in the most extreme kind of spiritualism. 

A formal sociological clarification of the distinction between 
the categories 'generation location', 'generation as actuality', and 
'generation unit', is important and indeed indispensable for any 
deeper analysis, since we can never grasp the dominant factors 
in this field without making that distinction. If we speak simply 
of 'generations' without any further differentiation, we risk 
jumbling together purely biological phenomena and others which 
are the product of social and cultural forces: thus we arrive at a 
sort of sociology of chronological tables [Geschichtstabellensoziologie) , 
which uses its bird's-eye perspective to 'discover' fictitious genera- 
tion movements to correspond to the crucial turning-points in 
historical chronology. 

It must be admitted that biological data constitute the most 
basic stratum of factors determining generation phenomena; but 
for this very reason, we cannot observe the effect of biological 
factors directly; we must, instead, see how they are reflected 
through the medium of social and cultural forces. 

As a matter of fact, the most striking feature of the historical 
process seems to be that the most basic biological factors operate 
in the most latent form, and can only be grasped in the medium 
of the social and historical phenomena which constitute a secon- 
dary sphere above them. In practice this means that the student of \ 
the generation problem cannot try to specify the effects attribu- 
table to the factor of generations before he has separated all the 
effects due to the specific dynamism of the historical and social 
sphere. If this intermediary sphere is skipped, one will be tempted 
to resort immediately to naturalistic principles, such as generation, 
race, or geographical situation, in explaining phenomena due to j 
environmental or temporal influences. 

The fault of this naturahstic approach lies not so much in the 
fact that it emphasizes the role of natural factors in human life. 



312 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

as in its attempt to explain dynamic phenomena directly by some- 
thing constant, thus ignoring and distorting precisely that inter- 
mediate sphere in which dynamism really originates. Dynamic 
factors operate on the basis of constant factors — on the basis of 
anthropological, geographical, etc., data — but on each occasion 
the dynamic factors seize upon different potentialities inherent in 
the constant factors. If we want to understand the primary, 
constant factors, we must observe them in the framework of the 
historical and social system of forces from which they receive 
their shape. Natural factors, including the succession of genera- 
tions, provide the basic range of potentialities for the historical 
and social process. But precisely because they are constant and therefore 
always present in any situation, the particular features of a given process of 
modification cannot be explained by reference to them. 

Their varying relevance (the particular way in which they can 
manifest themselves in this or that situation) can be clearly seen 
only if we pay proper attention to the formative layer of social and 
cultural forces. 

G. THE GENERATION IN RELATION TO OTHER FORMATIVE 
FACTORS IN HISTORY 

It has been the merit of past theorizing about generations that 
it has kept alive scientific interest in this undoubtedly important 
factor in the history of mankind. Its one-sidedness, however — this 
may now be said in the light of the foregoing analysis — lay in the 
attempt to explain the whole dynamic of history from this one 
factor — an excusable one-sidedness easily explained by the fact 
that discoverers often tend to be over-enthusiastic about 
'phenomena they are the first to see. The innumerable theories of 
history which have sprung up so luxuriantly recently all manifest 
this one-sidedness: they all single out just one factor as the sole 
determinant in historical development. Theories of race, genera- 
tion, 'national spirit', economic determinism, etc., suffer from this 
one-sidedness, but it may be said to their credit that they bring at 
least one partial factor into sharp focus and also direct attention 
to the general problem of the structural factors shaping history. 
In this they are definitely superior to that brand of historiography 
which limits itself to the ascertainment of causal connections 
between individual events and to the description of individual 
characters, and repudiates all interest in structural factors in 
history, an attitude which eventually had to result in the conclu- 
sion that nothing after all can be learned from history, since all of 
its manifestations are unique and incomparable. That this cannot 
be so, must be realized by anyone who takes the liberty to think 
about history rather than merely to collect data, and also observe 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 313 

in everyday life how every new departure or outstanding per- 
sonality has to operate in a given field which, although in constant 
process of change, is capable of description in structural terms. 

If in our attempts to visualize the structure of the historical 
dynamic we refuse to deduce everything from a single factor, the 
next question is whether it is not perhaps possible to fix some sort 
of definite order of importance in the structural factors involved, 
either for a particular period or in general — for of course it 
cannot be assumed a priori that the relative importance of the 
various social or other factors (economy, power, race, etc.), must 
always be the same. We cannot here attempt to solve the whole 
problem: all that can be done is to examine more closely our own 
problem of generation in relation to the other formative factors 
in history. 

Petersen (22) had the merit of breaking away from that 
historical monism which characterized most earlier theories of 
generations. In dealing with the concrete case of romanticism, 
he tried to treat the problem of generations in conjunction with 
other historical determinants such as the ethnic unit, the region, 
the national character, the spirit of the epoch, the social struc- 
ture, etc. 

But however welcome this break with monistic theory is, we 
cannot agree with a mere juxtaposition of these factors (apparently 
this is only a provisional feature of the theory) ; the sociologist, 
moreover, cannot yet feel satisfied with the treatment of the social 
factor, at least in its present form. 

If we are speaking of the 'spirit of an epoch', for example, we 
must realize, as in the case of other factors, too, that this Zeitgeist, 
the mentality of a period, does not pervade the whole society at 
a given time. The mentality which is commonly attributed to an 
epoch has its proper seat in one (homogeneous or heterogeneous) 
social group which acquires special significance at a particular 
time, and is thus able to put its own intellectual stamp on all the 
other groups without either destroying or absorbing them. 

We must try to break up the category of Zeitgeist in another 
fashion than Finder did. With Finder, the Zeitgeist as a fictitious 
unit was dissolved, so as to make the real units, i.e. for Pinderj 
the generation entelechies, visible. According to him, the Zeitgeist 
is not one organic individuality, since there is no real, organic 
entelechy corresponding to it. It would seem to us, too, that there 
is no such Zeitgeist entelechy which would confer organic unity on 
the spirit of an epoch; but in our view the real units which have 
to be substituted for the fictitious unit of Zeitgeist are entelechies 
of social currents giving polar tension to each temporal segment 
of history. 



314 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

Thus the nineteenth century has no unitary Zeitgeist, but a com- 
posite mentahty made up (if we consider its pohtical mani- 
festations) 1 of the mutually antagonistic conservative-traditional 
and liberal impulses, to which was later added the proletarian- 
socialistic one. 

We would, however, not go quite as far as Finder does in his 
denial of any temporal unity, and in his determination to attribute 
any homogeneity found in the manifestations of an epoch to a 
quite accidental crossing of various otherwise separate entelechies 
(accidental chords). The Zeitgeist is a unitary entity (otherwise, 
it would be meaningless to speak of it), in so far as we are able to 
view it in a dynamic-antinomical light. 

I The dynamic-antinomical unity of an epoch consists in the 
'fact that polar opposites in an epoch always interpret their 
world in terms of one another, and that the various and opposing 
political orientations only become really comprehensible if viewed 
as so many different attempts to master the same destiny and solve 
the same social and intellectual problems that go with it. 2 Thus 
from this point of view the spirit of an age is no accidental co- 
incidence of contemporary entelechies (as with Finder); nor does 
it constitute itself an entelechy (a unified centre of volition — or 
formative principle, as with Fetersen) on a par with other 
entelechies. We conceive it, rather, as a dynamic relationship of 
tension which we may well scrutinize in terms of its specific 
character but which should never be taken as a substantial 
'thing'. 

Genuine entelechies are primarily displayed by the social and 
intellectual trends or currents of which we spoke above. Each 
of these trends or currents (which may well be explained in terms 

1 We draw on examples deliberately from the history of political ideas, 
partly to counterbalance the tendency (especially evident in Germany) to 
study the problem of generations exclusively in the context of the history of 
literature or art; and partly to show that we believe that the structural situation 
of decisive social impulses and also the differentiation between generations is clearest at 
this point. The other entelechies and changes of style must of course be studied 
for their own sake independently, and cannot be derived in any way from 
political factors, but their reciprocal relations and affinities can best be under- 
stood and made clear from this angle. The artist certainly lives in the first 
instance in his artistic world with its particular traditions, but as a human 
being he is always linked with the driving forces of his generation even when 
politically indifferent, and this influence must always transform even purely 
artistic relations and entelechies. As a point of orientation for a survey of the 
whole structure, the history of political ideas seems to us to be most important. 
This matter will be further dealt with below. 

2 From our point of view, the 'spirit of an age' is thus the outcome of the 
dynamic interaction of actual generations succeeding one another in a con- 
tinuous seiies. 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 315 

of the social structure) evolves certain basic attitudes which exist 
over and above the change of generations as enduring (though 
nevertheless constantly changing) formative principles underlying 
social and historical development. Successively emerging new 
generations, then, superimpose their own generation entelechies 
upon the more comprehensive, stable entelechies of the various 
polar trends; this is how entelechies of the liberal, conservative, 
or socialist trends come to be transformed from generation to 
generation. We may conclude from this: generation units are no 
mere constructs, since they have their own entelechies; but these 
entelechies cannot be grasped in and for themselves: they must 
be viewed within the wider framework of the trend entelechies. 
It follows, furthermore, that it is quite impossible either to delimit 
or to count intellectual generations (generation units) except as 
articulations of certain overall trends. The trend entelechy is 
prior to the generation entelechy, and the latter can only become 
effective and distinguishable within the former — but this does 
not mean to say that every one of the conflicting trends at a given 
point of time will necessarily cause new generation-entelechies to 
arise. 

It is quite wrong to assume, for example, that in the first decades 
of the nineteenth century there existed in Germany only one 
romantic-conservative generation, 1 which was succeeded later by 
a liberal-rationalistic one. We should say, more precisely, that 
in the first decades of the nineteenth century the situation was 
such that only that section of the younger generation which had 
its roots in the romantic-conservative tradition was able to develop 
new generation-entelechies. This section alone was able to leave 
its own mark on the prevailing tone of the age. What happened 
in the thirties, then, was not that a 'new generation' emerged 
which somehow happened to be liberal and rationalistic — but 
the situation changed, and it now became possible for the first 
time for the other section of the younger generation to reconstitute 
the tradition from which it derived in such a way as to produce 
its own generation-entelechy. The fundamental differentiation 
and polarization were undoubtedly always there, and each current 
had its own younger generation: but the opportunity for creative , 
development of its basic impulse was granted first to the romantic 
conservatives, and only later to the liberal-rationalists. 

We may say in this sense, that Petersen's^ distinction between 
a leading, a diverted, and a suppressed type of generation is both s^y 
correct and important, but it is not yet expressed in a sufficiently 

1 Romanticism and Conservatism did not always go together. Romanticism 
\vas originally a revolutionary movement in Germany, the same as in France. 
- Petersen (22), pp. 146 ff. 



3ib THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

precise form, because Petersen failed to analyse the corresponding 
sociological differentiation. 

Petersen assumes a direct interaction between supra-temporal 
character types on the one hand, and the Zeitgeist (which he 
considers as an unambiguously ascertainable datum) on the 
other, as if the historic process consisted in these two factors 
struggling with each other, and the fate of the single individuals 
were actually determined by their reciprocal interpenetration. 
Let us take, as an illustration of Petersen's method, an individual 
of an emotional type; he would be what Petersen would call a 
'romantically inchned' character. If we further suppose that this 
man lives in an age the spirit of which is essentially romantic, this 
coincidence may well result in a heightening of his romantic 
inchnations, so that he will belong to the 'leading type' of his 
generation. Another individual, however, in whom emotional 
and rational inclinations tended more or less to balance one 
another, could in similar circumstances be drawn over into the 
romantic camp. Thus he would represent Petersen's diverted ty^c. 
If we take finally, a third individual who by nature was rationalist- 
ically inclined but living in a romantic epoch, he would represent 
the suppressed type. Only two alternatives would be open to him: 
either he could swim with the tide and, against his own inclina- 
tions, follow the romantic tendencies of his time — a course which 
would lead to stultification — or, alternatively, if he insisted on 
maintaining his ground, he could remain isolated in his time, an 
epigone of a past, or the forerunner of a future generation. 

Apart from the somewhat cursory way in which 'emotional' and 
'romantically inclined' are taken as synonymous, there is some- 
thing essentially correct in this classification of generation types 
into leading, diverted, and suppressed. But what occurs is no clash 
between supra-temporal individual dispositions existing in a supra- 
social realm on the one hand, and an undifferentiated unitary 
Zeitgeist (because no such thing really exists) on the other. The 
individual is primarily moulded by those contemporary intel- 
lectual influences and currents which are indigenous to the partic- 
ular social group to which he belongs. That is to say, he is in the 
first instance in no way affected or attracted by the Zeitgeist as a 
whole, but only by those currents and trends of the time which are 
a living tradition in his particular social environment. But that 
just these particular trends and not others should have taken root 
and maintained themselves in his world is ultimately due to the 
fact that they afford the typical 'chances' of his life situation 
their most adequate expression. There is therefore no question 
of an undifferentiated 'spirit of the age' promoting or inhibiting 
the potentialities inherent in individual characters: in concreto the 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 317 

individual is always exposed to differentiated, polarized trends 
or currents within the 'global spirit of the age', and in particular 
to that trend which had found its home in his immediate environ- 
ment. The individual's personality structure will be confronted, 
in the first place, with this particular trend. 

The reason why literary historians tend to overlook the fact 
that most people are confined to an existence within the limits of 
one of the trends of their time, and that the 'spirit of the age' is 
always split up into a number of tendencies rather than being 
now exclusively romantic, now exclusively rationalistic, is that 
their material consists primarily of biographies oi hommes de lettres, 
a social group of a very particular character. 

In our society only the hommes de lettres exist as a relatively 
unattached [freischwebend) group (this being, of course, a socio- ^ ^ 
logical determinant of their situation); hence, they alone can ^ 
vacillate, joining now one trend, now another. In the first half 
of the nineteenth century, they tended to embrace trends sup- 
ported by a young generation which, favoured by circumstances 
of the time, had just achieved an intellectually dominant position 
— i.e. trends which permitted the formation of entelechies. The 
period of the Restoration and the social and political weakness 
of the German bourgeoisie at the beginning of the nineteenth 
century favoured the development of entelechies at the romantic- 
conservative pole of the younger generation, which also attracted 
a large part of the socially unattached literati. From the thirties 
on, the July revolution and the growing industrialization of the 
country favoured the development of new liberal rationalist 
entelechies among the younger generation; and many of the 
literati promptly joined this camp. 

The behaviour of these hommes de lettres, then, gives the im- 
pression that at one moment the 'spirit of the age' is entirely 
romantic, and at the next entirely liberal-rationalist, and further . 
that whether the spirit of the age is to be romantic or rationalist \ 
is exclusively determined by these literati — poets and thinkers. In / 
actual fact, however, the decisive impulses which determine the 
direction of social evolution do not originate with them at all, but 
with the much more compact, mutually antagonistic social groups 
which stand behind them, polarized into antagonistic trends. 
This wave-like rhythm in the change of the Zeitgeist is merely 
due to the fact that^ — according to the prevailing conditions — 
now one, and then the other pole succeeds in rallying an active 
youth which, then, carries the 'intermediary' generations and in 
particular the socially unattached individuals along. We do not 
wish to underrate the enormous importance of these literary strata 
(a social group to which many of the greatest thinkers and poets 



3i8 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

belong), for indeed they alone endow the entelechies radiating from 
the social sphere with real depth and form. But if we pay exclusive 
attention to them, we shall not be able re ally to account for this 
vector structure of intellectu al currents/Takingthe whole histmicah- 
alTd^ociaT process into consideration, we can say that there h as 
never been an cyoch. ^e ntirely romantic, or entirely rationalist in 
charactefT'aFleast since the nineteenth century, we clearly have 
to deal with a culture polarized in this respect. It may very well 
be asserted, however, that it is now the one, now the other of 
these two trends that takes the upper hand and becomes dominant. 
In sociological terms, to sum up once more, this means simply 
that the circumstances of the time favour the formation of a new 
generation-entelechy at one or the other pole, and that this new 
entelechy always attracts the vacillating middle strata, primarily 
the literary people of the time. Thus the socially attached indi- 
vidual (to whatever psychological 'type' he may belong) alHes 
himself with that current which happens to prevail in his particular 
social circle; the socially unattached homme de lettres of whatever 
psychological type, on the other hand, generally must clarify 
his position with regard to the dominant trend of his time. The 
outcome for the individual of this battle between his own natural 
disposition, the mental attitude most appropriate to his social 
situation, and the dominant trend of his time, undoubtedly differs 
from case to case; but only a very strong personality will be in a 
position to maintain his individual disposition in face of the 
antagonistic mental attitude of the social circle of his origin, 
especially if his group happens to be in process of rising in the 
social scale. An irrationally inclined 'bourgeois' would find it as 
difficult to come into his own in the forties of the nineteenth 
century as a young aristocrat with rational inclinations to preserve 
his rationalism in face of the rise of romanticism and religious 
revivalism in his social circle. We find for the most part that the 
opponents of a new generation-entelechy consist mainly of people 
who, because of their 'location' in an older generation, are unable 
or unwilling to assimilate themselves into the new entelechy 
growing up in their midst. 

The generation location always exists as a potentiality seeking 
realization — the medium of such realization, however, is not a 
unitary ^^eitgeist but rather one or the other of the concrete trends 
prevailing at a given time.i Whether new generation-entelechies 

1 This can also be observed in the modern youth movement, which is 
constantly in process of social and political polarization. Purely as a social 
phenomenon, it represents a coherent actual generation entity, but it can only 
be understood concretely in terms of the 'generation units' into which it is 
socially and intellectually differentiated. 



THE SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 319 

will be formed at one pole in the social vector space or another 
depends, as we have seen, on historical group destinies. 

There remains one further factor which we have not yet 
considered and which must be added to the others, complicated 
enough as they are. 

We have not yet considered the fact that a newly rising 
generation-entelechy has not equal possibilities of asserting itself 
in every field of intellectual pursuit. Some of these fields tend to 
promote the emergence of new entelechies; others, to hinder it. 
And we can grade the different fields according to the degree to 
which they evidence the existence of generation entelechies. 

Thus, for example, the natural sciences in which factors of 
total orientation {Weltanschauung) play a less important part than 
in other fields, definitely tend to conceal generation-entelechies. 

The sphere of 'civilization' 1 in general, by virtue of the uni- 
linear nature of developments falling within it, tends to conceal 
experiential and volitional transformations to a far greater extent 
than does the sphere of 'culture'. And v/ithin the sphere of 'culture' 
itself, Pinder is certainly right in ascribing to linguistic mani- 
festations (religion, philosophy, poetry, and letters) a role different 
from that played by the plastic arts and music. ^ 

In this field, however, we need a finer differentiation. It will 
have to be shown how far the various social and generation 
impulses and formative principles have peculiar affinities to this 
or that art form, and also whether they do not in certain cases 
bring new art forms into existence. 

We must also consider the degree to -which, forms of social inter- 
course show stratification according to generations. Here, too, we 
find that certain forms of intercourse are more adequate to one 
particular set of social and generation trends than others. Mentre 
(19) has already shown that an association deliberately organized 
on the basis of written statutes is much less capable of being 
moulded by new generation impulses than are less formal group- 
ings (such as literary salons for example). Thus, it appears that in 
the same way as factors in the social and historic '".I realm exercise 
either a restrictive or encouraging influence on the emergence 
of generation-entelechies, the degree to which various cultural 
'fields' lend themselves to serving as sounding-boards for a new 
generation cannot be exactly determined in advance. All this 
indicates from yet another point of view that the generation 
factor — which at the biological level operates with the uniformity 
of a natural law — becomes the most elusive one at the social and 

1 Cf. A. Weber: 'Prinzipielles zur Kultursoziologie' {Archiv fur Soz. Wiss. 
u. Soz- Politik, 1920). 
-Finder (23), p. 156. 



320 THE PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

cultural level, where its effects can be ascertained only with great 
difficulty and by indirect methods. 

The phenomenon of generations is one of the basic factors 
contributing to the genesis of the dynamic of historical develop- 
ment. The analysis of the interaction of forces in this connection 
is a large task in itself, without which the nature of historical 
development cannot be properly understood. The problem can 
only be solved on the basis of a strict and careful analysis of all its 
component elements. 

The formal sociological analysis of the generation phenomenon 
can be of help in so far as we may possibly learn from it what can 
and what cannot be attributed to the generation factor as one of 
the factors impinging upon the social process. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE PROBLEM 
OF GENERATIONS 

1. Agathon, Lesjeunes gens d'aujourd'hui. Paris (Plon Nourrit), 191 2. 

2. Ageorges, La marche montante d''une generation {i8go-igio), 19 12. - 

3. Bainville, Histoire de trois generations. 

3a. Boas, F., Changes in Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants. 
Washington, 191 1. 

4. Brinckmann, A. E., Spatwerke grosser Meister. Frankfurt, 1925. / 

5. Boll, F., Die Lebensalter. Ein Beitrag zur antiken Ethnologie und zur \ 

Geschichte der ^ahlen. Berlin, 191 3. \ 

6. Cournot, Considerations. 1872. , 

7. Curtius, E. R., Die literarischen Wegbereiter des neuen Frankreichs. 

Potsdam. 

8. Dilthey, Ober das Studium der Geschichte der Wissenschaften vom 

Menschen, der Gesellschaft und dem Staat. 1875. Abgedr. Ges. Schr. 
Bd. v., pp. 36-41. (Abbreviated: Dilthey.) 

9. , Leben Schleiermachers. Bd. i, 2. Aufl. Berlin, Leipzig, 1922. 

10. Dromel, Justin, La loi des revolutions, les generations, les nationalites, les 

dynasties, les religions. Didier & Co., 1862. 

11. Ferrari, G., Teoria dei periodi politici. Milano (Hoepli), 1874. 

12. Heidegger, 'Sein und Zeit'. Jahrb.f Philosophic u. phdnomenologische 

Forschg., Bd. VIII, Halle a.d.S., 1927, pp. 384 f. 

13. Herbst, F., Ideale und Irrtiimer des akademischen Lebens in unserer ^eit. 

Stuttgart, 1823. 

14. Honigsheim, P., 'Die Pubertal'. Kolner Vierteljahrshefte fur Soziologie. 

Jahrg. Ill (1924), Heft 4. 

15. Grimm, Jakob, Uber das Alter. Reclams Universal-Bibl. No. 531 1. 

15a. Giese, 'Erlebnisform des Alterns', Deutsche Psychologic, 5 (2). 
Halle, 1928. 

16. Joel, K., 'Der sekulare Rhythmus der Geschichte'. Jahrb.f Sozi- 

ologie, Bd. I, Karlsruhe, 1925. 

321 



322 BIBLIOGRAPHY OF PROBLEM OF GENERATIONS 

i6a. Korschelt, E., Lebensdauer, Altern und Tod. 3. Aufl., 1924. 
(Bibliogr.) 

17. Kummer, F., Deutsche Literaturgeschichte des ig. Jahrhunderts. Darge- 

stellt nach Generatiorien. Dresden, 1900. 

17a. Landsberger, Franz, 'Das Generationsproblem in der Kunst- 
geschichte'. Kritische Berichte, Jahrg. 1927, Heft 2. 

18. Lorenz, O., Die Geschichtswissenschaft in Hauptrichtungen und Aufgaben 

kritisch erortert, Teil I, Berlin, 1886; Teil II, 1891. 

19. Mentre, F., Les generatiom sociales. Ed. Bossard, Paris, 1920. 

20. Nohl, H., 'Das Verhaltnis der Generationen in der Padagogik'. 

Die Tat (Monatsschrift), Mai 19 14. 

21. Ortega y Gasset, Die Aufgabe unserer Z^it. Introd. by E. R. Curtius. 

Zurich, 1928. (Kap. I, 'Der Begriff der Generation'.) Verl. d. 
Neuen Schweizer Rundschau. 

22. Petersen, Die Wesensbestimmung der Rornantik. (Kap. 6, 'Generation'.) 

Leipzig, 1925. 

23. Pinder, Kunstgeschichte nachCenerationen. ^wischen Philosophie undKunst. 

Johann Volkelt zum 100. Lehrsemester dargebracht. Leipzig, 
1926. 

24. , Das Problein der Generation in der Kunstgeschichte Europas. 

Berlin, 1926. (Abbreviated: Pinder.) 

25. Platz, R., Geistige Kdmpfe in modernen Frankreich. Kempten, 1922. 

26. Riimelin. 'Uber den BegrifT und die Dauer einer Generation', 

Reden und Aufsdtze I. Tiibingen, 1875. 

27. Schurtz, H., Altersklassen und Mdnnerbiinde. Eine Darstellung der 

Grundformen der Gesellschaft. Berlin, 1902. 

28. Spranger, Psychologie des Jugendalters. Leipzig, 1925. 

29. Scherer, W., Geschichte der deutschen Literatur, 3. Aufl. Berlin, 1885. 

30. Valois, G., D'un siecle a V autre. Chronique d'une generation {i88§-ig2o). 

Nouvelle librairie nationale. Paris, 1921. 

3 1 . von Wiese, L., Allgemeine Soziologie als Lehre von den Beziehungsgebilden, 

Teil I. Beziehungslehre. Miinchen and Leipzig, 1924. 

32. , 'Vater und Sohne', Der Meue Strom, ^ahrg. i, Heft 3. 

33. Zeuthen, H. G., 'Quelques traits de la propagation de la science de 

generation en generation'. Rivista di Scienza, 1909. 



INDEX 



Absolute, the, i8, 172, 175, 223 

Abstraction, 35-6 

Achievement, 236-7 

Action and contemplation, 250, 266 

Adler, A., 236 n. 

Ambiguity of terms, 79 n. 

Ambition, 27, 236, 250 ff. 

Analysis, historical, alternative views, 

109 
— , structural, 12 
Apriorism, formal, 149 
Art motive, Riegl's, 76-7, 283 
— , plastic, and general culture, 76 
Aspiration, and knowledge, 103 
Atomistic competition, 203 

Bakunin, 213-14 
Ball, F., 293 
Barth, P., 108 n. 
Being, dynamic, 146 

— and meaning, 161 

— and thought, contrast, 139, 142, 

152 
Bergson, 107 
Biography, 73-4 
Bolzano, Bernhard, 154 
Bourgeois democracy, 153 
Brentano, Franz, 154 
Brinckmann, A. G., 293 
Brinkmann, C, 139 
Bureaucracy, 26 
Bureaucratization, 249-50, 266 
Bureaucrats, ambition and, 266 ff. 
Burschenschaften, 309 

Capitalism, 150 

Career, and success, 247 ff., 258 

Catholicism, and phenomenology, 

154-5 
Church, the, and science, 17 
Civilization, and culture, disting- 
uished, 1 15-16 



Class position, 289 

— , and race, 60 

— , reality of, 148 

Class-consciousness, 290 

Commitment and interest, 183-4 

Competition, intellectual, 25, 191 ff. 

— , free, ambition under, 262 

Comte, 16, 224, 277 

Concentration, 207 ff. 

Confessions of faith, aesthetic, 58 

Conflict, theoretical, 195 

Confucianism, 260 

Consensus, 199 

Conservatism, German, 20-2 

— , and value-free knowledge, 217 

Conservative Party, German, 2 1 1 ff. 

— , and progressive, 297 

Constellation, meaning, 134 

Contacts, fresh, 293-4 

Contemplation, see Action 

Content, and form, 48—9, 91 

— , intended expressive, 54 

Cosmopolitanism, 168 n. 

Cournot, 278 

Croce, B., 88 n. 

Cultural products, meaning of, 43 ff. 

— trends, and classes, 125 

Culture, submerged, 66 

Cunow, H., 106 n. 

Currents, doctrinal, 208 

Dahlke, H. O., 28 

Descartes, 205 

Determination, 29-30 

Dialectic, 189-90, 214, 223 

Dilthey, W., 5, 12, 37-8, 58, 60, 75, 

80, 107, 118, 204, 280, 281-2, 283, 

285 
Donoso Cortes, 216 
Dostoievsky, 253 
Driesch, 5 
Dromel, J., 278 



323 



324 

Durkheim, E., 149 
Dvorak, Max, 4, 56 n., 80-1 

Eckhart, Meister, 250 
Economic activity, motives of, 272 
— , the, as mental, 163 
Education, 26-7, 230 ff. 

— task of, 233-4 
Eichner, Johannes, 74 n. 
Empirical reality, respect for, 174-5 
England, Enlightenment in, 209 
Enlightenment, the, 139, 209 
Entelechy, 23, 283 

— , generation, 309-10 
Epistemology, 9-1 1, 92-3, 1 12-13, 

227-8 
Epochs, and history of ideas, 181 
Espinas, 279 
Evolution, 86 

— , dialectical and progressive, 1 15 ff 
— , Troeltsch and, 100 
Experience, 39 
Expression and documentation, 43 

Factors, real and ideal, 159 

Facts, social approach to, 148 

Fame, 239 

'Feeling', 65 

Ferrari, 278 

Fiedler, K., 46, 51, 160, 164 

Flexibility of ambition, 261 ff. 

Flint, R., 108 n. 

Forerunners, 308 

Form, aesthetic, 53 

— and matter, 153 
— , visual, 73 n. 

France, Enlightenment in, 209 
— , 'generations' and, 280 
Freedom, 27 
French Revolution, 20 
Freud, 236 n., 255, 295 
Function, change of, 188 

Geistesgeschichte, 4, 13 
Generation, as activity, 303 
— , concept of, 22, 276 ff. 
— , duration of, 278 
— , units, 24, 306-7 
Germany, 20-1 
— , Enlightenment in, 209 
— , 'generations' and, 280 
Gesture, 52-3 
Giese, 293 
Gottl, von, 253 
Greco, El, 56 n. 



INDEX 



Grimm, Jacob, 293 
Group, social, change of, 293 
Groups, concrete social, 288 
Griinwald, E., 28-9 
Guilds, 261-2 
Gundolf, Friedrich, 4 

Habits, 231 

Hegel, 34, 59 n., 119,. 143, 175, 178, 

179, 189, 206, 222-5, 282, 283 
Hegelians, 107 

Heidegger, M., 15 n., 196, 197, 282 
Herder, 209 
Historicism, 6-7 
— , arguments against, 90 ff. 
— , Mannheim's, 14-15, 18, 84 ff. 
— , meaning, 85 
■ — , and relativism, 104 
— , Troeltsch and, 97 ff. 
— , two orientations, 106-7 
— , as Weltanschauung, 85 
History, philosophy of, 87-8 
— , synthesis and, 5 
Honigsheim, P., 203, 204, 293 
Hugo, 308 n. 
Humanism, 139 
Hume, 277 
Husserl, E., 7, 41 n., 43, 103, 107 

Idea, reality of concept, 148 
Ideas, history of, 180 ff. 
— , pre-existence of, 164 
Ideologies, unmasking of, 141 
Ideology, total, 13 
Intellectual strata, 186-7 
Intellectuals, 24 
'Intentional acts', 8 
Interest, 183, 217-18 
Internationalism, 168 n. 
Interpretation, 12 
Intuition, essential, 155 

Jaspers, Karl, 60 n. 
Jerusalem, 149 
Joel, 286 

Kant, 7, loi, 104 

Knowledge, existentially determined, 

— , value-free, 2 1 6 ff. 
Kracauer, S., 269 n. 
Kummers, 286 n. 

Lager ung, 23, 288 ff. 
Language, 300 



INDEX 



325 



Leisure, 268-9 

Lessing, 160 

Levy-Bruhl, 149, 279 

Liberalism, attitude to value-free 

knowledge, 216 
Lies, 1 40- 1 

Location, 23, 120 ff., 290 ff. 
— , similarity of, 297 ff. 
Logic, 9-10 
— , history of, 112 
Lorenz, O., 278, 280, 286 n. 
Louis, Paul, 267 n. 
Lukacs, George, 3, 59 n., 106 n., 

124 n., 150, 218 



'Making' and 'growing', 221 

Managers, 265 

Mannheim, K., influences on, 2 ff. 

Marx, 143-4, 213-14 

Marxism, 3-4, 18, 140, 150, 157, 183, 

184 
Materialist conception of histor>% 149, 

161 
Meaning, 41 n., 151 
— , of cultural products, 43 ff. 
— , documentary', 55 ff. 
— , expressive and intended, 63 n. 
— , functional and immanent, 19 
— , kinds of, 12-13 
— , objective, elements of, 67-8 
— , — , and expressive, 48 ff. 
— , — , two t^-pes, 51 
— , sign- and form-, 52 
— , units and Gestalts of, 69 
Meillet, 300 
Melody, 64-5 
Mentre, 278, 279-80, 319 
Mercantilism, 262 
Metaphysics, 175 
Middle Ages, 202-3 
Milieu, 234 

Monopoly position, 201 
Montesquieu, 209 
Mores, 1 1 2 
Mviller, Adam, 257 
Miiller, J. von, 206 
Miinzner, G., 211 



Naumann, H., 200 
Nietzsche, 107, 308 n. 
Nohl, H., 75 
Nominalism, 203-4 
Northrop, F. S. C., 17 



Object, the, and abstraction, 35-6 
Oppenheimer, F., 196, 224 
Otto, Rudolf, 66 n. 

Panofsky, E., 58 n., 73 n. 

Pattern of interpretation, dominant, 

199 
Perception, Gestalt theor>', 305-6 
— , and meaning, 54 n. 
Perspective, historical, 105 
Petersen, 286 n., 313, 315-16 
Phenomenologists, 7 
PhenomenologN', Scheler's, 154 ff. 
Philosophy, and historicism, 90 
— , of nature, 36 

— , rational and irrational in, 112 
— , Weltanschauung and, 75 
Physiocrats, 195 
Pinder, 282 ff., 313-14 
Polarization, 22, 25, 211, 215 ff. 
Positivism, 8, 16, 19, 149 ff. 
Power, and success, 240, 242, 246 
— , struggle for, 25 
Presentation, mediate and immediate, 

43 
Prestige, 239 
Progress, dialectical, 117 
— , in historical theory, 106 
— , tempo of, 277 
Progi'essive and conservative, 297 
Proverbs, 200 
Psychology, s^Tithesis in, 95 

Race and class, 60 

Ranke, 206, 223 

Raphael, 160 

Rationalisrh, 21 

Realism, 203-4 

Reality, bases of public interpretation 

of, 198 
Realization, 236 
Reik, T., 236 n., 256 
Relationship, social, 23 
Relativism, 14 
— , historicism and, 104, 127 
Relativity of knowledge, existential, 

194 
Remembering, social, 294 
Representation, 43 n. 
Revolutions, post- 19 18, 3 
Rickert, 5, 41 n. 

Riegl, A., 4, 36, 57, 76-9, 186 n., 283 
Ross, E. A., 196 
Rumelin, 278 n., 280 



326 



INDEX 



Saint-Simon, 142 

Scheler, Max, 8, 16-17, 59 n., 118, 

154 fF. 
Scherer, 286 n. 
Schmitt, C, 216 
Schopenhauer, 107 
Schurtz, H., 288 n. 
Science, as form of knowledge, 1 6 
— , oppositional, 139-40, 145 
Sciences, fundamental, 1 1 
Selves, other, knowledge of, 59 n., 252 
Semper, 44 

Sensitivity range of, 201 
Sentimentality, 65 
Sequence, developmental, types, 1 1 5- 

16 
Sexuality, 247 

Significance, elements of, 169 
Simmel, 107 
Smith, Adam, 195 
Smith, Elliot D., 269 n. 
Social groups, use of facts by, 147 
— sphere, relativity of thought to, 

141-2 
Socialism, and value-free knowledge, 

217 
Sociology, development of, 125 
— , possible types, 157 
— , 'real' and 'cultural', 156 
Socrates, 130 
Sombart, W., 58, 78 n., 186 n., 210, 

222, 242 
Space, aesthetic and physical, 50, 

Specialization, in history, 34-5 

Speier, Hans, 269 n. 

Spengler, O., 78 

Spirit of age, understanding of, 61-3, 

74 
Spranger, E., 41 n., 59 n., 60 n., 293 
Stahl, 213 

Standards, historical variation in, 105 
— , multiplicity of, 5-6, 105 
Standpoints, contemporary, 149 
— , and study of history, 165 n. 
State, the, 124 
Stein, L. von, 260 
Stendhal, 253 
Stratification, 297-8 
— , intellectual and social, 186 
— , social, history of, 182 
Structural Analysis of Epistemology, 9-10 
'Structural' approach, 9 
Structure, of cultural product, 64 ff. 
Stubbornness of facts, 1 73 



Style, 35-6 

Subjects, collective, 61 

Sublimation, 170 

— of concepts, 79 

Success, 26, 236 ff. 

— , in career, 247 ff. 

— , economic, 257 fT. 

— , objective and subjective, 237-8 

— , stability of, 240 

Suspension, 62-3 

Synthesis, 25, 95, 224 ff. 

— , cultural, 4-5 

Systematization, 9 

Taine, 308 n. 

Theory, 39-40, 71 ff. 

— , autonomy of, 94-6 

'They', 197-8 

Thinking, existentially determined, 

24-5> 28-9, 193 fir. 

Thomas Aquinas, 202 

Thought, relativization of, 137 ff. 

— , self-transcendence of, 137 

— , variety of modes of, 206 

Thurnwald, R., 21 1 

'Timeless' philosophy, 155-6 

Tolerance, 246 

Totality, 143-4 

Traditionalism, 21 

Troeltsch, E., 82 n., 97 ff., 121, 128, 

132, i33> 150, 157 
Truth, absolute, 177 
— , existential definition of, 31 
— , of history, 2 1 
— , meaning of, 15, 31 
— , static and dynamic, 14-15 

'Unhappy consciousness', 232 
Unity of being, 153 
— of human nature, 158 
Unmasking, 140 
Utopianism, post-1918, 3 

Validity, lo-ii, 152 fF. 
Values, absolute and relative, 6, 8 
— , absoluteness of, 128 
Vollzugsbedachtheit, 253 

Wahl, A., 209 

Weber, Alfred, 37 n., 87 n., 114, 216 

Weber, Max, 5, 25-6, 58, 63 n., 78 n., 

80, 81 n., 116, 157, 186 n., 235 n., 

239, 240 n., 271-2 
Wegelin, 192 
Weltanschauung, 13, 33 ff. 



INDEX 327 



Weltanschauung, and art, 76 fT. Wolfflin, H., 73 n. 

— , a-theoretical, 38-9, 41 World postulates, 185 

— , how presented, 43 ff. — War I, effects of, 2 

— , and philosophy, 75 Wundt, 5 

Wiese, L. von, 23, 191, 196, 302 

Windelband, 5 Zeitgeist, 284, 313, 316 



'|W' J 



Li'^IMiKSIlV OF O.^. ^ - ' 

Los Angeles 
- -^T^'Ti:. — »»,*. lost ^■'testa'Tipe'' below. 



Umve«,V of California Librae 
Los AngeJes 



^^^^^^^^^^hJlBJi^nd^cl^,^,^ 




3 1158 00005 9906 



2b 
M51e 



V- 
